

--- Page 1 ---

Nomination of a Member of the House of Representatives
Single nomination – endorsed candidate

This form should be used where an individual candidate for the House of Representatives is endorsed by a 
registered political party and nominated by the Registered Officer of the political party.

A registered officer of a registered political party may not nominate more than one candidate as an endorsed 
candidate for a single Division in any State or Territory.

Additional information is available in the Candidates Handbook and the Nomination Guide.

To the Divisional Returning Officer for the division of

CHECKLIST

I am the:

 Registered Officer

or

 Deputy Registered Officer

Name of Registered Officer/Deputy Registered Officer

Name of Registered political party

Candidate Family name

Candidate Given name(s)

Nomination of a Member of the 
House of Representatives form 
(form 60) correctly filled in with all 
relevant questions answered.
All nomination forms signed and 
dated.
Candidate’s deposit ($1000 in 
cash or a cheque drawn by a 
bank or other financial institution 
on itself) is enclosed.
Appointment of Candidate Agent 
form included (if applicable).

AEC Use Only
Receipt No.

I request that printed on the ballot paper adjacent to the name of the candidate appears:

DRO received name

 The registered 
 party name

or

 The registered abbreviation 
 of the party name

 I request the logo of the party entered in the Register to appear on the ballot papers

I nominate/endorse the candidate listed above as a Member for the  
House of Representatives for the Division indicated.

Signature of Registered Officer/Deputy Registered Officer Date

DRO Signature

Date

/

/

Time received (24 hour)

/

/

:

Information on this form is collected under the provisions of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (CEA).
The nomination form will be publicly produced at the time of the declaration of nominations, which takes place 24 hours after nominations close, and may be inspected at any 
time following the declaration of nominations by members of the public in accordance with the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918.
No responsibility will be taken for faxed nominations and no acknowledgement of receipt of faxes will be advised. The form may be sent by fax to the relevant Divisional 
Returning Officer (DRO). No other kind of electronic communication will be accepted. The time of receipt for faxed forms is the time when the message enters the relevant 
Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) fax machine memory and it is agreed that the AEC is not responsible for any deadlines missed or losses incurred. The deposit cannot be 
lodged electronically, and it is the responsibility of the candidate to ensure that both the fax and the required deposit are received by the DRO before the close of nominations.
If a Registered Officer or a Deputy Registered Officer nominates a party’s endorsed candidates for the House of Representatives to the Australian Electoral Officer (AEO), no 
nomination of any other candidates endorsed by that party should be made to a DRO within that State or Territory. If a nomination for another candidate endorsed by the same 
party is lodged with a DRO all the party’s nominations made to the AEO under section 167(3) of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 will be rejected (section 172 CEA).
If your party has a logo entered in the Register of Political Parties at the time of nomination, you may request to have that logo printed adjacent to the candidate’s name on the 
ballot paper. 
For further information, please refer to the AEC website at www.aec.gov.au or call 13 23 26. 
Giving false or misleading information is a serious offence.

AECEF060-bAustralian Electoral Commission 290416 EF060-b