

--- Page 1 ---

From: 
Sent: Tuesday, 8 December 2020 5:40 PM
To: Andrew Johnson <Andrew.Johnson@aec.gov.au>; Antonia Exposito <Antonia.Exposito@aec.gov.au>; Jeff Pope
<Jeff.Pope@aec.gov.au>; Julie Igglesden <Julie.Igglesden@aec.gov.au>; Justin Sowden <Justin.Sowden@aec.gov.au>
Subject: Google Political Advertising Transparency Program

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open attachments
unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.

Hi all, 

Thanks for your time today. Google looks forward to working with the AEC on the next federal election. 

Please find below links to the information we're providing to political parties, Members and Senators. The AEC is
welcome to share these links and information with stakeholders. 

Election Advertising: 

If you intend to run election ads on Google platforms read the policy and if you need to register do so
here.  Leave at least 5 business days for approval. 
Learn how to use Google Ads via our free Digital Garage training platform. 
Individuals and organisations can be verified. See the requirements. 
Contact us to dispute an ad disapproval.
Ensure you comply with Google Ads policies including our misrepresentation policy. If you are suspended
for a violation, you can appeal here. 
If you see something amiss you can report an ad. Try to take a screenshot of what you are seeing, and to
save the URL so we can follow up as quickly as possible. 
See the existing transparency reports for countries in which Google’s program is operating. These are
updated daily. Australia’s report will launch in 2021.

Action Items

Per the discussion today, following are a couple of places where we state our expectations that all
advertisers on our platforms comply with local law. If you have any feedback about the way this is
expressed, please let me know and I will pass onto the team for consideration:

On our Google Ads policy page under political content we state that "We expect all political ads and
destinations to comply with the local campaign and election laws for any area the ads target. This
policy includes legally mandated election “silence periods”.
On the page titled Verification for election advertising in Australia the current requirement reads
"Attestation that the organisation applying for verification has or will satisfy the appropriate


--- Page 2 ---

disclaimer requirements under Australian law.". 

We'd be happy to organise follow up discussion on misinformation as a shared challenge. It would be very
useful to understand the AEC's experience dealing with the death tax issue at the last election and
perhaps working through any other case studies you are able to share, which could help us prepare for
similar scenarios. Please let me know who I should work with at the AEC to coordinate this meeting. 
In the meantime, our YouTube misinformation approach is here and more specifically, here is some
information on how YouTube supports elections. You might recognise some of the issues as being more
relevant to the US and other countries, but it would be very helpful to understand any specific risks or
threats which may be applicable in Australia.
Please let me know if there are other ways that Google's public policy team might be able to support the
AEC as we move closer to the election. Some updates from the last federal election are here, here here,
and here to give you an idea of our work. 
I hope I've captured everything -- let me know if not! 

I look forward to continuing the conversation. 

Yours sincerely, 

Government Affairs and Public Policy