

--- Page 1 ---




--- Page 2 ---

AEC authorised officer for the purposes of s 132(1) of the Electoral Act, authorised the advertisement 
of the Application in 10 newspapers nationally and on the AEC website (OBJECT ID: A1389361). 

OFFICIAL 

On 11 February 2022, the Application was advertised on the AEC website and in 10 major 
newspapers. A copy of the advertisement is at OBJECT ID: A1354991. The closing date for the 
submission of written particulars was 11 March 2022.  

The AEC received four sets of written particulars (‘objections’) during the public consideration period 
for the Application, from three persons (‘the Objectors’).  

Written particulars submitted 

Written particulars 
from 

Date received 

Relevant part of 
the Electoral Act 

OBJECT IDs: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

 Ernst 

Ernst 

 Neil 

 Lis 

10 March 2022 

Ss 126 or 129 

10 March 2022 

Ss 126 or 129 

10 March 2022 

Ss 126 or 129 

10 March 2022 

Ss 126 or 129 

– original - A1428572 
– redacted - A1428570 
– original - A1431087 
– redacted - A1431089 
– original - A1428568 
– redacted - A1428566 
– original - A1428574 
– redacted - A1428564 

Legislative framework – written particulars 
Section 132(2)(b) of the Electoral Act provides that a person can only submit written particulars 
objecting to an application to register a party (or a logo in the case of s 132(2)(b)(iv) of the Electoral 
Act) if the person believes that:  

a)  the application does not relate to an eligible political party; or 
b)  the application is not in accordance with s 126 of the Electoral Act 
(the section setting out the requisite contents of an application); or  

c)  the application should be refused under s 129 of the Electoral Act (the name and 

abbreviation tests); or 

d)  the Electoral Commission should refuse to enter a logo of the party in the Register under 

s 129A of the Electoral Act (the logo test). 

For the Application, written particulars are required to meet the following administrative requirements 
under ss 132(2)–(3) of the Electoral Act: 

1.  be in writing; 
2.  be signed by the objector (either physically, or electronically as per s 10(1) of the Electronic 

Transactions Act 1999); 

3.  specify a postal address of the objector that does not consist of a post office box number 
(noting the definition of ‘address’ in s 123(1) of the Electoral Act and the postal service 
requirements in s 140(1) of the Electoral Act); 

4.  be submitted within 1 month after the publication of the relevant s 132(1) Notice on the AEC 

website; and 

5.  set out the objector’s belief that the Application should be refused for a reason listed in 

s 132(2)(b) of the Electoral Act and provide grounds in support of that belief. 

Written particulars received objecting to the Application must be processed in accordance with 
ss 132(4) and (5) of the Electoral Act. This requires the Electoral Commission to make the written 
particulars available for public inspection (published on the AEC website) under s 132(4) of the 
Electoral Act, and provide a copy to the Registered Officer for an opportunity to reply under s 132(5) 
of the Electoral Act. 

Minute  

Page 2


--- Page 3 ---

Summary of Objection one from 

Ernst

OFFICIAL 

‘At the time the application for registration as a political party was lodged it was clear from 
interviews published in the media including the Canberra Times that Mr David Pocock was a 
citizen of a foreign country, Zimbabwe, and therefore ineligible for the Senate.’ 

‘The AEC should not accept registration of a party named in relation to a person who is 
ineligible for the Senate.’ 

‘To name a party with the name of a person who at the time of application for registration of 
the party is ineligible for election is surely inappropriate.’ 

‘Election of a number of persons to the Parliament was overturned by the High Court. 
Amongst other things the High Court held the critical issue was eligibility at the time of 
nomination.’ 

‘The AEC should reject this registration application. Mr Pocock should be invited to resubmit 
the application if and when he has become eligible for election to the Senate.’ 

Summary of Objection two from  Ernst 

‘I submit this proposed name must be rejected because the proposed name is not consistent 
with the concept of a party. 

Simply put, a party is a body of persons united in some sort of cause or opinion or otherwise 
engaged together. 

A single person or the name of a single person cannot constitute a party. Accordingly I submit 
the registration must be rejected. 

This can be compared or contrasted with the proposed registered party logo, David Pocock 
for the ACT. That represents a cause. So an application to register the name of a party along 
the lines David Pocock for the ACT may well be valid. So would a name along the lines David 
Pocock for the environment. Names along these lines indicate a cause or opinion or some 
sort of engagement beyond a mere name. 

The AEC will appreciate that an invalid registration could have serious consequences. For 
example if this ‘party’ was registered and placed above the line and the candidate was 
successful another candidate could challenge the validity of the election. 

The AEC should not countenance such obvious uncertainty which can so easily be corrected 
by a fresh application with a name that satisfies the concept of ‘party’.’ 

Summary of Objection from 

 Neil 

: 

‘I object to acceptance of the proposed party name as simply “David Pocock”.’ 

‘Such a title is a person’s name only and not indicative of a political party and social cause. If 
the applicant wishes only to be referred to by name, as a candidate he can appear in that way 
below the line on the ballot paper. If this application is successful. The same words would be 
printed on the ballot paper above and below the line which would surely be confusing.’ 

‘Secondly, if media reports and suggestions are correct in that, at the time of submission of 
the application for registration of a political party, Mr Pocock was a citizen of another country, 
surely this renders him in eligible to submit such an application until such time as he has 
surrendered citizenship of that other country.’ 

Minute  

Page 3


--- Page 4 ---

Summary of Objection from 

 Lis 

: 

OFFICIAL 

‘A single person or the name of a single person cannot constitute a party. The reason being: a 
party is a body of persons united in some sort of cause or opinion or otherwise engaged 
together. 

This can be compared or contrasted with the proposed registered party logo, David Pocock 
for the ACT. That represents a cause. So an application to register the name of a party along 
the lines David Pocock for the ACT may well be valid. So would a name along the lines David 
Pocock for the environment. Names along these lines indicate a cause or opinion or some 
sort of engagement beyond a mere name.’ 

‘However, a single name on its own obviously does not constitute a party in accordance with 
the ordinary meaning of party, hence I submit the registration must be rejected.  

‘The AEC will appreciate that an invalid registration could have serious consequences. If this 
‘party’ was registered and placed above the line and the candidate were to be successful, 
then another candidate could challenge the validity of the election. 

The AEC should not countenance such obvious uncertainty which can so easily be corrected 
by a fresh application with a name that satisfies the concept of a ‘party.’ 

On 16 March 2022, the Registered Officer of the Party, Mr Glenn Cummings, responded to the 
written particulars contained in the objections from ‘Ernst’, ‘Neil’ and ‘Lis’ (OBJECT ID: A1435232 
and A1435234). The response was published on the AEC website in accordance with s 132(6) of the 
Electoral Act.  

The response from the Party to each of the objections is outlined below. 

‘In summary, our client’s view is that there has been nothing raised in the Objections which, 
under the Act, would either (i) prevent the Electoral Commissioner from registering the Party 
or (ii) respectfully, permit the Electoral Commissioner to decline to register the Party, as a 
non-Parliamentary party under Part XI of the Act.).’ 

In relation to Objections from Ernst (2), Neil (3) and Lis (4) the Party responded that: 

a)  none of the particulars of the Objections refer to a provision of the Act which would prevent 

the registration of the Party with its proposed name;  

b)  there is no requirement in the Act that a name of a party be ‘consistent with the concept of a 

party’;  

c)  the ground invites a qualitative evaluation of what a party should be or how it should operate 
which goes far beyond the requirements in the Act and in doing so asks the Commissioner to 
perform a task which it is not empowered by the Act to do;  

d)  in any event, the objects and operation of the Party meet the requirements of the Act as set 
out at 6(a) such that it is entirely consistent with the concept of a party. The name is simply 
the means by which that party is identified and there is no requirement that the name include 
a specific reference to it being a ‘party’, ‘group’ or some other ‘cause based entity’ as is 
argued in the Objections. 

In relation to the second Objection from Ernst the Party responded that: 

a)  it is a speculative allegation that the outcome of the election could be challenged on the basis 
that the Party is placed above the line and the Objections are silent as to which provision of 
the Act could properly found such a challenge or declaration of invalidity under s 362 of the 
Act; 

Minute  

Page 4


--- Page 5 ---

b)   again, it invites a qualitative evaluation of the effect of the name of a party, where that name 

does not contain any of the prohibited features in s 129 of the Act. 

OFFICIAL 

In relation to Objections from Ernst (1) and Neil (3) (the Section 44 reference) the Party responded 
that: 

a)  the question of eligibility of a proposed endorsed candidate of a party for election is separate 

to the eligibility of a party to be registered as a non-Parliamentary Party; 

b)  the Party meets the requirements for registration as a non-Parliamentary Party and the 

eligibility of any proposed endorsed candidates is not permitted by the Act to be undertaken in 
the assessment of a party registration application; 

c)  even if it were relevant to consider the eligibility for election of a proposed candidate, the point 
at which a candidate must be eligible is the point at which they nominate for election, not the 
point at which the party is registered. 

‘Based on the above, the Party submits that the Electoral Commissioner should reject the 
particulars in the Objections and not decline to register the Party on the basis of such 
particulars.’ 

Consideration of the Objections and the Response 

Under ss 132A(1) and 133(3) of the Electoral Act, if the Electoral Commission refuses an application 
for registration, the Electoral Commission must: 

•  publicise the reasons for the Electoral Commission’s decision; and  
•  give written notice of those reasons to the applicant(s); and 
•  give written notice of those reasons to any person who submitted an objection under s 132(2) 

in relation to the application. 

Under ss 133(1) and 133(1A) of the Electoral Act, if the Electoral Commission makes a determination 
that a political party should be registered, the Electoral Commissioner must:  

•  publish notice of the registration on the AEC website (and may publish the notice in any other 

way that the Electoral Commissioner considers appropriate); 
•  give written notice of the registration to the applicant(s); and 
•  give written notice to any person who submitted an objection under s 132(2) in relation to the 

application, setting out the reasons for rejecting the person’s reasons for making their 
objection. 

You are a delegate of the Electoral Commission for the purposes of ss 132A(1), 133(1) and 133(3), 
and you are authorised to publish notice of registration under s 133(1A) of the Electoral Act. 
A copy of a draft statement of reasons (‘the Draft Statement of Reasons’) is at OBJECT ID: 
A1389673 and has been drafted on the recommendation that you make the determination that the 
Party should be registered. 

Although it would not be a legal requirement for you to publicise or provide reasons to the Applicants 
if you make the determination that the Party should be registered (as opposed to if you decide to 
refuse the Application), the Draft Statement of Reasons has been drafted in the interests of 
transparency and consistency.  

Conclusion 

On 24 December 2021, the AEC received all of the procedural requirements for an application for 
registration from the Applicants under ss 126(1)(b) and 126(2) of the Electoral Act. 

Minute  

Page 5


--- Page 6 ---

OFFICIAL 

On 4 February 2022, a delegate for the purposes of s 131 of the Electoral Act of the Electoral 
Commission determined that the Application passed the initial assessment. The delegate (also an 
authorised officer for the purposes of s 132(1) of the Electoral Act) approved the advertisement of the 
Application in 10 newspapers circulating generally in each State and Territory and on the AEC 
website. The Application was advertised on 11 February 2022 and four sets of written particulars 
from three objectors, were received during the public consultation period by the closing date of 11 
March 2022. 

After considering the objections and response from the Party, the AEC found there are no additional 
grounds or information provided to give reason for the delegate to refuse the application for 
registration.  

Based on this information, there is no basis to refuse the Application and the Application should be 
approved for registration. Under s 126(3) of the Electoral Act you, as a delegate of the Electoral 
Commission, have the authority to approve the Application. 

Minute  

Page 6


--- Page 7 ---

