

--- Page 1 ---

AGREEMENT FOR THE SAFEGUARD OF ELECTOR INFORMATION 

VEDA ADVANTAGE INFORMATION SERVICES AND SOLUTIONS LTD NOW KNOWN AS 
EQUIFAX AUSTRALIA INFORMATION SERVICES AND SOLUTIONS PTY LIMITED 
ABN 26 000 602 862 

, Group Managing Director, Australia and New Zealand, make this Deed Poll on 

I, 
behalf of the Veda Advantage Information Services and Solutions Ltd, now known as Equifax 
Australia Information Services and Solutions Pty Limited (‘the Organisation’), a prescribed 
organisation specified in the table at subsection 8(1) of the Electoral and Referendum Regulation 
2016 (‘the Regulation’), understand and agree that the Australian Electoral Commission (‘AEC’) 
may give a copy of a Roll (or an extract of a Roll) (‘Elector Information’) to the Organisation under 
items 5 and/or 7 of the table in subsection 90B(4) of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (Cth) 
(‘the Electoral Act’) subject to compliance with this Agreement for the Safeguard of Elector 
Information (‘the Safeguard Agreement’). 

1.  Provision of Elector Information 

1.1. 

For the purpose of the Safeguard Agreement the Elector Information that may be provided to 
the Organisation, on request by the Organisation and payment of the fee in accordance with 
clause 10, is: 

(a) 

(b) 

Surname and given names; and 

Real place of living (Note: Address information cannot be provided in relation to 
silent electors and is not available for itinerant and eligible overseas electors). 

1.2.  Notwithstanding this Safeguard Agreement, the Electoral Commission or delegate may 

exercise its discretion to not give the Organisation Elector Information at any time. 

2.  Use of Elector Information 

2.1. 

The Organisation must ensure that Elector Information is not used for any purpose other 
than the permitted purpose as specified in section 91A of the Electoral Act.  

2.2. 

The permitted purposes under items 5 and 7 of the Electoral Act for the Organisation are: 

(a) 

(b) 

to verify, or contribute to the verification of, the identity of persons for the purposes 
of the Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988 (‘FTR Act’); 

to facilitate the carrying out of applicable customer identification procedures under 
the AML/CTF Act. 

2.3. 

The Organisation must ensure that Elector Information: 

(a) 

(b) 

is stored and communicated securely in accordance with clause 3 below; 

is not accessed by any: 

(i)  person (other than as permitted under clause 4); or 

Safeguard agreement with Veda Advantage Information Services and Solutions Ltd for the Safeguard of Elector 
Information


--- Page 2 ---

(ii)  organisation that is not the relevant Organisation prescribed in column 3 of the 

table in Part 2, subsection 8(1) of the Regulation in respect of the 
Organisation; 

(c) 

that persons permitted to access the Elector Information are aware of the 
conditions and penalties specified in clause 4.5 below; and 

(d) 

is destroyed and deleted in accordance with clause 5 below. 

2.4. 

The Organisation will ensure that the end user of the identity verification check is notified 
that the source of the Elector Information used to enable the check is the AEC. 

3.  Data security, confidentiality and protection of Elector Information 

3.1. 

3.2. 

3.3. 

3.4. 

The Organisation acknowledges that it is an ‘APP entity’ as defined by the Privacy Act 1988 
(Cth) (‘the Privacy Act’) and as such will, at all times, comply with the requirements of that 
Act.  

The Organisation acknowledges that Elector Information received under items 5 and/or 7 of 
the table in subsection 90B(4) of the Electoral Act includes confidential and personal 
information and agrees to:  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

take all reasonable steps to ensure that the Elector Information supplied is 
protected against loss, and against unauthorised access, use, modification, 
disclosure or other misuse;  

not disseminate any publications or information otherwise released from data 
compilations in a manner that is likely to enable the identification of a particular 
person;  

ensure that access to Elector Information is in accordance with clause 4 of this 
Safeguard Agreement; and  

ensure that all Elector Information is stored within a system with adequate controls 
on access in accordance with clause 3.7 of this Safeguard Agreement.  

The Organisation must notify the AEC of all unauthorised access, use, modification or 
disclosure of Elector Information irrespective of whether a report is made to the Office of the 
Australian Information Commissioner (‘OAIC’). This notice must be in writing, and provided 
as soon as the Organisation is aware of the unauthorised use or disclosure. 

In accordance with the mandatory Notifiable Data Breach (‘NDB’) scheme under  
Part IIIC of the Privacy Act, if the Organisation becomes aware, or has reasonable grounds 
to suspect, a data breach has occurred, involving Elector Information that is personal 
information that is likely to result in serious harm to any individual affected the Organisation 
must: 

(a) 

undertake a reasonable and expeditious assessment to determine if the data 
breach is likely to result in serious harm to any individual affected; and  

Safeguard agreement with Veda Advantage Information Services and Solutions Ltd for the Safeguard of Elector 
Information 

Page 2 of 9


--- Page 3 ---

(b) 

(c) 

notify the AEC of any Eligible Data Breach (as that term is defined in the Privacy 
Act), in writing as soon as practicable; and  

if the assessment determines that the breach constitutes an eligible data breach, 
notify the OAIC; and  

(d) 

notify all affected individuals in accordance with the NDB Scheme. 

3.5.  When reporting an Eligible Data Breach, the Organisation will provide the AEC with full 

details of the reported breach and copies of any reports or communications between the 
organisation and the OAIC relevant to the reported data breach. 

3.6. 

If the Organisation receives a complaint alleging interference with the privacy of an individual 
by the Organisation arising out of operations within the permitted purpose for the use of the 
Elector Information the Organisation will: 

(a) 

(b) 

immediately notify the AEC of the nature of that complaint and such details of that 
complaint as are necessary to minimise any (or further) interference; and  

keep the AEC informed as to the progress of that complaint as it relates to the 
Organisation’s actions in connection with that allegation of interference. 

Storage of Elector Information 

3.7. 

The Elector Information must be stored and communicated securely and the Organisation 
must ensure that the Elector Information: 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

is not copied (except when uploading the Elector Information in accordance with 
sub-clause 2.3  or as part of standard system redundancy and backup process);  

is uploaded to a computer facility that is owned and operated solely by the 
Organisation or is operated and maintained by a third-party under contract with the 
Organisation. Any terms of the relevant contract must mirror section 95B of the 
Privacy Act; 

is stored on a computer facility in such a way as to restrict access to the Elector 
Information, including any standard system redundancy and backup copies, to 
permitted persons in accordance with clause 3; and 

where there is a need to communicate the Elector Information for use in 
accordance with this Safeguard Agreement, the Elector Information must be 
encrypted using a Commonwealth Government approved protocol. 

3.8. 

3.9. 

The Organisation must not transmit, hold or process the Elector Information outside 
Australia.  

The Organisation must disclose in writing to the AEC all third-party vendors that have access 
to their IT systems and notify the AEC within one month of any contractual change of third-
party vendor. 

Safeguard agreement with Veda Advantage Information Services and Solutions Ltd for the Safeguard of Elector 
Information 

Page 3 of 9


--- Page 4 ---

3.10.  The Organisation must disclose in writing to the AEC any system that stores Elector 

Information which is managed by a third-party vendor.  

3.11.  Clause 3 will survive the expiration or termination of this Safeguard Agreement. 

4.  Access to Elector Information 

4.1. 

The Elector Information must only be accessed and used for a permitted purpose by: 

(a) 

(b) 

the Organisation’s employees, who work in a team that has been authorised by 
the Group Managing Director to access Elector Information based on a genuine 
need for the performance of duties; or 

those persons who provide services to the Organisation under a contract 
(‘Contract Staff’) who have executed a Deed Poll under sub-clause 4.2, who 
work in a team that has been authorised by the Organisation to access Elector 
Information based on a genuine need for the performance of duties. This definition 
of Contract Staff includes staff at a third-party vendor that manages any system 
which stores Elector Information. 

4.2. 

The Organisation must require all of the Organisation’s employees and Contract Staff, who 
may access, use or disclose Elector Information as part of their employment duties, to 
execute a Deed Poll provided by the AEC as to the Permitted Purpose of Elector Information 
before accessing the Elector Information as part of their duties. The Organisation must 
inform the AEC if an Organisation employee and/or Contract Staff member who has 
executed a Deed Poll is no longer accessing, using or disclosing Elector Information. 

4.3. 

The Organisation must require all of the Organisation’s employees and Contract Staff, who 
may access, use or disclose Elector Information as part of their employment duties to 
undertake training which outlines the sensitivity of the data and their legislative requirements 
as referenced in this Safeguard Agreement. 

4.4. 

The Organisation must capture and log all records of training attendance, including the dates 
that the training was undertaken. 

4.5. 

The Organisation must ensure that its employees and Contract Staff are made aware that: 

(a) 

(b) 

the use of Elector Information for purposes other than a permitted purpose may 
constitute a breach of section 91A of the Electoral Act, which carries a penalty of 
up to 100 penalty units. The value of a penalty unit is set by section 4AA of the 
Crimes Act 1914 (Cth) and is currently  $210); 

an offence under Division 478 of the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth) (‘the Criminal 
Code’) may be committed by: 

(i)  unauthorised access to, or modification of Elector Information for a purpose 

that is not a permitted purpose. If a person is found guilty of an offence under 
478.1 of the Criminal Code, a court may impose a maximum penalty of up to 2 
years imprisonment; 

Safeguard agreement with Veda Advantage Information Services and Solutions Ltd for the Safeguard of Elector 
Information 

Page 4 of 9


--- Page 5 ---

(ii)  unauthorised impairment of the reliability, security or operation of the data held 
on the disk or other medium containing the Elector Information. If a person is 
found guilty of an offence under 478.2 of the Criminal Code, a court may 
impose maximum penalty of up to 2 years imprisonment;  

(iii) possession or control of Elector Information with intent to commit a computer 

offence. If a person is found guilty of an offence under 478.3 of the Criminal 
Code, a court may impose maximum penalty of up to 3 years imprisonment; or 

(iv) producing, supplying or obtaining the Elector Information with the intent to 

commit a computer offence. If a person found guilty of an offence under 478.4 
of the Criminal Code, a court may impose maximum penalty of up to 3 years 
imprisonment. 

4.6. 

4.7. 

4.8. 

(c) 

the Elector Information must remain in the Organisation’s power, possession or 
control and must be securely stored at all times. 

The Organisation must undertake an annual review of user access rights to ensure user 
access rights to the data are commensurate with roles and responsibilities. 

The Organisation must log all access to and undertake the monitoring of audit logs, to 
monitor for the ongoing appropriate use/access to the Elector Information. 

The Organisation must retain the inputs (e.g. user listings or audit logs that were reviewed) 
and outputs (e.g. actions undertaken after the review) of both forms of review outlined above 
and provide these inputs and outputs to the AEC where required and upon request by the 
AEC. 

5.  Destruction of Elector Information 

5.1.  On the earlier of:  

(a) 

(b) 

the expiration of the period ending six months after the receipt of the Elector 
Information by the Organisation, or  

the receipt of an updated version of the Electoral Information (or earlier if the 
Organisation decides that it no longer requires the Elector Information). 

The Organisation must ensure that any medium containing the Elector Information provided by the 
AEC, including all copies of the Elector Information (as distinct from information about an individual 
that is merged in the Organisation’s records for the relevant permitted purpose) is: 

(c) 

securely deleted and destroyed in accordance with the destruction instructions 
provided by the AEC; or 

(d) 

delivered to the AEC by registered mail. 

5.2.  Within two weeks of the occurrence of an event specified in clause 5.1, and at the direction 
of the AEC, the Organisation must provide to the AEC a Certificate of Destruction (using the 
template provided) that attests to the: 

Safeguard agreement with Veda Advantage Information Services and Solutions Ltd for the Safeguard of Elector 
Information 

Page 5 of 9


--- Page 6 ---

(a) 

(b) 

deletion of the Elector Information earlier uploaded to the computer facility; and 

destruction or return by registered mail of the discs or other medium provided by 
the AEC that contain the Elector Information provided before the receipt of the 
new Elector Information from the AEC (as the case requires). 

5.3. 

The Organisation acknowledges that the provision of Elector Information remains at the 
discretion of the AEC and any request for access to such information by the Organisation 
may be refused. The Organisation may not be provided the next provision of Elector 
Information if the AEC is not satisfied that destruction has occurred. 

6.  Security Incidents 

6.1. 

For the purposes of this agreement a ‘Security Incident’ is any event that indicates that the 
security of an information system, service or network has been, or may have been, 
compromised.  

6.2. 

The Organisation must immediately advise the AEC’s National Enrolment Services Section 
(via email to rps@aec.gov.au) of any Security Incident involving Elector Information. 

7.  Organisational Change 

7.1. 

The Organisation will advise the AEC of any proposed changes to organisational structure or 
business process that may impact on the way Elector Information is accessed or used. This 
includes, but is not limited to, any new contractual arrangements which may facilitate a wider 
use of the Elector Information for the FTR Act and/or AML/CTF Act purposes. 

8.  Annual Assurance 

8.1. 

The Organisation must provide the AEC with an annual statement of assurance before 30 
June each year that the Elector Information has been used in accordance with the 
Safeguard Agreement. 

8.2.  Where the Organisation fails to provide such assurance, no further Elector Information will 
be provided until the AEC is fully satisfied that the Organisation is operating in strict 
conformance with the Safeguard Agreement. 

9.  Audits of the Management of the Elector Information 

9.1. 

9.2. 

9.3. 

The Organisation must undertake an independent audit of its compliance with the provisions 
of this Safeguard Agreement every three years. The audit must be undertaken at the 
expense of the Organisation and be undertaken by an auditor approved by the AEC 
Information Technology Security Advisor and the Assistant Commissioner responsible for 
Assurance at the AEC. 

The audit must be prepared pursuant to the provisions of the Standard on Assurance 
Engagements (ASAE 3150) issued by the Auditing and Assurance Standards Board. 

The Organisation must provide a copy of the audit report to the AEC within one (1) month of 
the audit report being available.  

Safeguard agreement with Veda Advantage Information Services and Solutions Ltd for the Safeguard of Elector 
Information 

Page 6 of 9


--- Page 7 ---

9.4. 

9.5. 

9.6. 

If an issue identified in an audit report has not been addressed to the AEC’s satisfaction 
within 30 business days after receipt of the audit report, the Electoral Commission or 
delegate may exercise its discretion to not give the Organisation Elector Information. The 
AEC may also direct the Organisation to destroy Elector information that it holds in 
accordance with clause 5, where an audit report identifies non-compliance with the 
Safeguard Agreement. 

The Organisation must report to the AEC, the results of internal and external 
audit/assurance activities undertaken in relation to systems and processes, as relevant to 
the management of the Elector Information. This includes independent assurances that third-
party vendors are subject to, such as ISO-37000 compliance audits, to ensure their IT 
systems are secure. 

The AEC may, on no less than ten (10) working days’ notice, undertake inspections and/or 
audits of the Organisation no more than once a year, at the Organisation’s cost to check the 
Organisation’s compliance with its requirements outlined in this Safeguard Agreement, or 
any Certificate of Destruction or Deed Poll signed by or required to be signed by the 
Organisation. The Organisation agrees to provide the AEC or its agents with reasonable 
access to their sites to facilitate inspections and/or audits. 

10. Financial arrangements 

10.1.  The Organisation understands that the AEC is entitled to recoup the costs incurred by the 

AEC in providing Elector Information to the Organisation in accordance with subsection 
90B(9) of the Electoral Act. 

10.2.  The Organisation must pay the service fee and receipt of the payment must be confirmed in 

order for the AEC to provide Elector Information. 

11. Review and termination of the agreement 

11.1.  This Safeguard Agreement will commence upon execution and expire three years from the 

date of execution. 

11.2.  The AEC may at any time review and vary the terms and conditions of this Safeguard 

Agreement and require the execution of a new Safeguard Agreement.  

11.3.  The AEC may at any time by written notice, terminate this Safeguard Agreement.  

11.4.  Upon receipt of a notice of termination from the AEC, the Organisation must: 

(a) 

(b) 

11.5. 

securely destroy or deliver to the AEC the Elector Information which is in the 
Organisation’s power, possession or control; and  

provide the AEC with a statutory declaration confirming that the secure destruction 
of the Elector Information or the secure delivery of the Elector Information to the 
AEC is complete and in accordance with this clause. 

Safeguard agreement with Veda Advantage Information Services and Solutions Ltd for the Safeguard of Elector 
Information 

Page 7 of 9


--- Page 8 ---

11.6.  Any notice under this Safeguard Agreement is only effective if it is in writing, signed by the 
person giving the notice and either delivered by hand, sent by pre-paid post, or transmitted 
electronically by electronic mail. 

11.7.  A notice: 

(a) 

must be sent to the Relevant Address using one of the means specified in the 
following subparagraphs: 

(i)      by hand or courier;  

(ii)     by post; or 

(iii)    electronic transmission; and 

(b) 

subject to paragraph (c) is delivered on a business day if delivery occurs before 5 
p.m. or otherwise on the next business day; and 

(c) 

is taken to have been delivered on a business day: 

(i)      by post, on the date that it should arrive in the ordinary course of the post 

from the date of posting for the method of postage used by the person giving 
the notice; 

(ii)     by electronic transmission on the day and at the hour of transmission, unless 

the sender receives a notice of failure of the transmission. 

11.8.  For the purposes of clause 11.7 the Relevant Address is for a notice to: 

(a) 

the AEC to be directed to the attention of the National Enrolment Services Section 
at: 

(i)      street address: 

50 Marcus Clarke Street 

Canberra ACT 2600 

(ii)     postal address: 

Locked Bag 4007 

Canberra ACT 2601 

(iii)    email: rps@aec.gov.au 

until otherwise notified by the AEC to the Organisation; 

(b) 

the Organisation to be directed to the attention of [state] at: 

(i)      street address: Level 15, 100 Arthur Street, North Sydney NSW 2060 

Safeguard agreement with Veda Advantage Information Services and Solutions Ltd for the Safeguard of Elector 
Information 

Page 8 of 9


--- Page 9 ---

(ii)     postal address: Level 15, 100 Arthur Street, North Sydney NSW 2060 

(iii)     email: companysecretariat@equifax.com 

Until otherwise notified by the Organisation to the AEC. 

12. Execution 

Executed as a Deed on 6th April 2020 

Signed by Lisa Marie Nelson, Group Managing 
Director, Australia and New Zealand who is duly 
authorised to make this Deed on behalf of the 
Organisation in the presence of: 

(Signature of witness) 

Monica Pasca 

 ............................................................................. 
(Name of witness) 

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
) 

(Signature) 

Safeguard agreement with Veda Advantage Information Services and Solutions Ltd for the Safeguard of Elector 
Information 

Page 9 of 9