

--- Page 1 ---

May 2022 

STANDARD RESPONSES 
Secure telephone voting social media queries 

Last updated: 17 May 2022  

Approved by:  Cathie Kennedy    
Position:     
Date: 

Director, Strategic Election Priorities Branch                     
16 May 2022


--- Page 2 ---

Contents 

From 8:00am Saturday 14 May – 6.00pm Wednesday 18 May ............................................. 2 

From 6.00pm Wednesday 18 May – 6.00pm Saturday 21 May ............................................. 2 

1


--- Page 3 ---

TOPIC/THEME 

RESPONSE 

From 8:00am Saturday 14 May – 6.00pm Wednesday 18 May 

I’m COVID-positive now. 
How should I vote? 

You can apply for a postal vote until 6pm Wed 18 May. Visit link to find 
out how. 

How do I return my postal 
vote if I’m in iso? 

Can someone in your household help? Visit link for more info about 
postal voting. 

I’m single / isolating away 
from family. Who can I get to 
witness my postal vote? 

The witness requirement is a key integrity measure for postal voting. 
For most, including COVID+ postal voters, they’ll have easy access to 
an appropriate witness. For others, they may be able to arrange with 
family or a friend, with safety measures in place, to complete this 
requirement swiftly & safely.  

What if my postal vote pack 
doesn’t get to me until after 
election day? 

If you test COVID-19 positive after 6pm Tues 17 May, you can vote by 
phone. Info will be here from 6pm Wed 18 May. 

Why should I have to vote if I 
have COVID-19? 

We want to help all eligible people have their say. It’s why we have the 
phone voting service this election.  

If pushed 

If you have a valid and sufficient reason for not voting and get a notice, 
you can write back to explain the reason why you couldn’t vote. 

Why can’t close contacts 
vote by phone?  

If you’re a close contact without symptoms and don’t need to isolate, 
you can still vote in person at a polling place. If you have symptoms 
and test positive after 6pm Tues 17 May, visit link for voting info. 

Why don’t you offer other 
voting locations, like at 
testing clinics? 

It’s not covered in our legislation. There are options if you’re COVID-19 
positive. Apply for a postal vote until 6pm Wed 18 May, and if you test 
positive after 6pm Tues 17 May you can vote by phone.  

From 6.00pm Wednesday 18 May – 6.00pm Saturday 21 May 

Who’s eligible to vote by 
phone? 

People who’re COVID-19 positive and will be in iso on Sat 21 May. You 
must register by 4pm AEST on election day and vote by 6pm. 

How do I register? 

Go to [link] and follow the prompts. This is the quickest way to register. 
You can also call 1800 413 960, but it might be a long wait.  

What are the registration 
opening hours? 

Online registration 

Opens Wed 18 May 6.01pm AEST. 

Closes Sat 21 May 4.00pm AEST. 

Phone registration  

Thurs 19 May 8.30am to 5.30pm local time. 

Fri 20 May 8.30am to 5.30pm local time. 

Sat 21 May 8.00am local time to 4.00pm AEST. 

2


--- Page 4 ---

TOPIC/THEME 

RESPONSE 

What proof do I need that I’m 
COVID-19 positive? 

If PCR – test centre location, date, time, and ref # from your health 
authority. If RAT – receipt # from health authority you registered your 
test with, and RAT brand and serial number (if avail). 

Where’s my RAT serial or 
reference number? 

Depends on the brand. Could be on the front or back of the packet, or 
next to an image or icon. It’s ok if you can’t find it – but you’ll need the 
brand and receipt # from the health authority that registered the positive 
test.  

Why isn’t the registration 
form working? 

If you’re COVID-positive and trying to register to vote online, there 
might be a delay. Check our website [link] for updates. 

If there was a known outage - unresolved 

Quick update about the online registration form for phone voting if 
you’re COVID-19 positive. Still working to fix it. Visit [link] for more info. 

If there was a known outage - fixed 

Thanks for your patience. The form’s back up now if you’d like to try 
again. 

Why can’t I get through to 
register by phone? 

It’s busy, so might take longer for you get through. Thanks for your 
patience. Keep trying, as queue times can fluctuate. 

How do I vote by phone? 

How can I view my ballot 
papers? 

What are the phone voting 
opening hours? 

Why is it taking so long to 
vote by phone?  

You need to register first. Details are at [link]. Once you’ve registered, 
go to the link from your SMS or email to view an image of the ballot 
papers for your electoral division. Have your eight-digit registration 
number, PIN, and voting preferences ready. 

Ballot papers for all electoral divisions are here [link]. 

Thurs 19 May 8.30am to 5.30pm local time. 

Fri 20 May 8.30am to 6.00pm local time. 

Sat 21 May 8.00am to 6.00pm local time. 

We know it’s frustrating to wait on the phone, especially if you’re not 
feeling well. This is an emergency service, and it’s busy, so there could 
be delays. Our operators also need to follow a process to keep your 
vote secure, which can take time. Make sure you have your voting 
preferences ready. 

How do I know my vote was 
recorded? 

The operator will read your vote back to you. If you wish, you can have 
a different operator read your vote back. 

How will they be counted? 

After voting closes on election day, envelopes will be sorted, 
reconciled, and packed for secure dispatch to their home division. 
There, they’ll be receipted, opened, and counted on the Wed after 
election day. 

3


--- Page 5 ---

TOPIC/THEME 

RESPONSE 

What if I’m still in the phone 
voting queue when polls 
close? 

Phone lines are open until 6pm Sat 21 May / today. If you’re registered 
and in the queue, you’ll still be able to vote. This might take longer if the 
service is busy. 

I couldn’t get through before 
voting closed 

Phone lines were open until 6pm Sat 21 May / today. If you registered 
and were in the queue at 6pm you were still able to vote.  

If pushed 

If you have a valid and sufficient reason for not voting and get a notice, 
you can write back to explain the reason why you couldn’t vote. 

Will I be fined for not voting? 

If you have a valid and sufficient reason for not voting and get a notice, 
you can write back to explain the reason why you couldn’t vote. 

Why can’t I just vote online? 

No online voting for federal elections is available, regardless of 
personal circumstances. 

Why isn’t phone voting 
always available? 

It’s an emergency measure during the pandemic. We do offer phone 
voting for those who are blind or have low vision, and those in 
Antarctica.  

What about people who 
speak another language? 

Info in 33 languages is here. When calling 1800 413 960 to register or 
vote, people can ask for an interpreter who speaks their language to 
join the call.  

What do you do with 
information from when I 
register?  

We don’t ask for personal details when you call. You get a registration 
number, which you quote when you call to vote. This ensures your vote 
remains secret.  

How can I make a 
complaint? 

You can send an email to phonevote@aec.gov.au 

4