

--- Page 1 ---

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Wednesday, 24 April 2019 6:23 PM
info@votetonyout.com
Authorisation Section
Authorisation of certain merchandise containing electoral matter [DLM=For-
Official-Use-Only]

Follow Up Flag:
Flag Status:

Follow up
Flagged

Dear 

The Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) has received complaints regarding unauthorised electoral content and 
merchandise being distributed by the “Vote Tony Out” website –  https://www.votetonyout.com/, and unauthorised 
advertising on the “Vote Tony Out” Facebook page – https://www.facebook.com/votetonyout/. 

The Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (Electoral Act) is concerned, among other things, that voters know who is 
communicating electoral matter to them.  The AEC does not provide legal advice on how to comply with the 
Electoral Act, however, I offer the following observations in relation to the authorisation requirements in the 
Act.  The Electoral Backgrounder: Electoral communications and authorisation requirements on the AEC website 
provides more information.  

The Electoral Act requires the communication of certain electoral matters to be authorised.  ‘Electoral matter’ is 
defined in section 4AA(1) of the Electoral Act to be a matter communicated or intended to be communicated for the 
dominant purpose of influencing the way electors vote in a federal election. 

A communication containing electoral matter must be authorised if it is: 

  a paid electoral advertisement, or 

  a sticker, fridge magnet, leaflet, flyer, pamphlet, notice, poster or how-to-vote card, or 

  a matter communicated by or on behalf of a disclosure entity (e.g. a candidate, Senator or Member of the 
House of Representatives, registered political party, an associated entity or other person or group who is 
required to submit a return under Part XX of the Electoral Act). 

It is an offence under section 321D(5) of the Electoral Act to make these types of electoral communications without 
proper authorisation.   

The AEC has checked the Vote Tony Out campaign sites and identified the following issues. 

Authorisation of Vote Tony Out stickers 

The stickers for sale on the Vote Tony Out website contain electoral matter that requires authorisation under 
section 321D(1)(b) of the Electoral Act.  Can you please stop selling and distributing the unauthorised stickers.  The 
other merchandise for sale on the website does not need to be authorised. 

Authorisation of Vote Tony Out Facebook page 

The Vote Tony Out Facebook page is currently running paid advertising promoting the Vote Tony Out rally on 
5 May.  This electoral advertising needs to be authorised or have a link to an authorised Facebook page.  The 
authorisation of a social media site only needs the name and city of the person authorising the site.  The 
authorisation can be added to the “About” section in a Facebook page. 

Authorisation of Vote Tony Out website 

1

47F47F


--- Page 2 ---

I note you have an authorisation on the Mail chimp webpage supporting the Vote Tony Out website.  To be prudent 
I recommend adding this authorisation to the bottom of the Vote Tony Out website (alongside the copyright notice) 
and/or on the website “About” page. 

Whether Vote Tony Out is or will become a third party (disclosure entity) for the purpose of the Electoral Act 

As noted above a disclosure entity must authorise all electoral communications.  A ‘disclosure entity’ is defined in 
section 321B of the Electoral Act to include a person or entity who will incur electoral expenditure during a financial 
year above the disclosure threshold (currently $13,800). 

If you think you will spend more than $13,8000 this financial year on electoral communications then you will need to 
provide a disclosure return to the AEC under Part XX of the Electoral Act and also must authorise all your electoral 
communications.  There are also other obligations on third parties in the Electoral Act, such as restrictions on 
receiving foreign donations.  

Actions 

Can you please: 

  Stop the sale and distribution of unauthorised Vote Tony Out stickers from the Vote Tony Out website.  If 

you want to sell more stickers, the stickers will need to have an authorisation added. 

  Authorise any paid electoral advertising on social media or elsewhere 

  Authorise the Vote Tony Out Facebook page and website (and if the Vote Tony Out Twitter site and 

Instagram page are also running paid electoral advertising or you think you will become a disclosure entity 
for the purpose of the Electoral Act, these sites should also include an authorisation)  

Can you please take this action by COB Monday 29 April and advise the AEC of this action. 

Yours sincerely 

 | Principal Government Lawyer 

Electoral Authorisation Section | Legal & Procurement Branch 
Australian Electoral Commission 
T: 

2

47FSection 47F