

--- Page 1 ---

Mr Tom Rogers
Australian Electoral Commissioner
Locked Bag 4007, Canberra City ACT 2601
commission.secretariat@aec.gov.au

Dear Mr Rogers,

I am writing to request an urgent internal review of the AEC’s decision to deregister the Australian Progressives,
as notified in the letter received on the 16th of March.

When reading through the reasoning given for deregistration, it became clear that some sort of clerical error has
occurred with the validation of the second member list that was submitted on February 11th 2022. In the
Breakdown of the first member list submitted on December 8th, the AEC was able to match 1475 members. The
second member list submitted on February 11, was an amended version of that same list - with insufficient
amendments to justify a 1290 person drop in match rate - from 96% on the December 8 list, to 12% on the
February 11 list.

We also note that there is a more substantial breakdown of the December 8 list, with members being manually
matched, as well as the identification of 13 deceased members. The lack of a similar breakdown in the response
to our February 11 submission suggests that the process has not been followed with the same level of rigour.

It is apparent that some form of clerical error has occurred in the AEC’s assessment of our membership list which
was submitted on the 11th of February - there is no other reasonable explanation for such a significant drop in
the number of members matched to the electoral roll.

We request that this matter is addressed urgently as the Federal election is due to be called within weeks - and
this error has put our ability to contest the election at risk. In addition, the Party risks reputational damage as a
result of this error, so we would appreciate prompt action to resolve it.

We are confident that we have over the 1500 required members to remain registered, as a reflection of our
team’s dedication to cleaning the list and verifying information, and believe that investigation of this clerical
error will support this confidence.

Regards,

Edward Carroll
Registered Officer
Australian Progressives
42 Messara Circuit
DURACK QLD 4077

edward.carroll@progressives.org.au

www.progressives.org.au

LEX3070 Released Document No. 911Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 2 ---

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

REDACTION CODES 

Personal Information (name) redacted. 

Personal Information (date of birth) redacted. 

Personal Information (place of birth) redacted 

Personal Information (citizenship) redacted. 

Personal Information (racial or ethnic origin) redacted. 

Personal Information (photograph) redacted 

Personal Information (facsimile of signature) redacted. 

Personal Information (facsimile of manuscript initialling) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individual’s address) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individual’s email address) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s telephone number or mobile number) 
redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s political opinion) redacted. 

Personal Information (opinion about individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individuals current or former occupation). 

Personal Information (employment history) redacted. 

Personal Information (qualifications) redacted. 

Personal Information (membership of a professional or trade association). 

Personal Information (membership of a trade union). 

Personal Information (health) redacted. 

Personal Information (membership of a political association) redacted 

Personal Information (religious beliefs or affiliations) redacted. 

Personal Information (sexual orientation or practices). 

Personal Information (criminal record). 

Personal Information (identifying individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (bank account details) redacted) 

Business information (bank account details) redacted. 

Business information (billing account details) redacted. 

Business information (ureasonably affect a person adversely in respect of his 
or her lawful business or professional affairs) redacted. 

Business Information (reasonably be expected to prejudice the future supply 
of information to the Commonwealth or an agency for the purpose of the 
administration of a law of the Commonwealth or of a Territory or the 
administration of matters administered by an agency). 

30. 

Business information (trade secret).


--- Page 3 ---

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

Business information (information having a commercial value that would be, 
or could reasonably be expected to be, destroyed or diminished if the 
information were disclosed). 

Legal Professional Communication redacted. 

Deliberative material redacted. 

Electoral Roll material redacted. 

Tests, examinations or audits material redacted. 

Management or assessment of personnel material redacted. 

Proper and efficient conduct of the operations of AEC material redacted. 

Lawful methods or procedures for preventing, detecting, investigating, or 
dealing with matters arising out of, breaches or evasions of the law redactged 

39. 

Irrelevant material redacted.