

--- Page 1 ---

Minutes 

Australian Electoral Commission 
Meeting No. 276 

Date: Wednesday 17 November 2021  Time: 4:00pm  Location: Microsoft Teams 

Attendees:  
The Hon. Justice Susan Kenny AM (Chairperson);  
Mr Tom Rogers (Electoral Commissioner);  
Dr David Gruen (Australian Statistician)   

Action Officer: 

 (Commission Secretariat) 

Agenda  

Item 

1.  Welcome 

2.  For decision: Seniors United Party of Australia 

3.  For decision: The New Liberals 

4.  Closing 

Agenda item 1: Welcome and Commissioner’s introduction 

The meeting opened at 4:00pm with the three-person Australian Electoral Commission (the 
Commission) in attendance; the Hon. Justice Susan Kenny, Mr Tom Rogers, and 
Dr David Gruen. 

section 47F


--- Page 2 ---

Agenda item 2: For decision: Seniors United Party of Australia 

In relation to the application for review regarding the deregistration of the Seniors United 
Party of Australia, the Commission examined and discussed the material before it, including 
the results of the assessment of the revised membership list submitted by the Party on 23 
September 2021. 

The Commission decided:  

•  To set aside the decision of the delegate made under s 137(6) of the Commonwealth 
Electoral Act 1918 (Cth) on 9 March 2021 to deregister the Seniors United Party of 
Australia; and 

•  To substitute a decision to take all such steps as are necessary to give effect to its 

decision, including to maintain the registration of the Seniors United Party of Australia 
by re-registering that Party. 

Agenda item 3: For decision: The New Liberals 

The Electoral Commissioner noted that The New Liberals sought his recusal from the review 
of the delegate’s decision to register The New Liberals “on the basis of reasonable 
apprehension of bias”, for the reasons stated in a document dated 5 July 2021.  The 
Electoral Commissioner advised that he had no “material personal interest” within s 29 of the 
Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013; no “direct or indirect 
pecuniary interest” within s 11 of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918; and that there was 
no basis for a reasonable apprehension of bias on his part.  Having considered the matters 
raised by The New Liberals, the other members of the Commission agreed that there was no 
basis shown for the Electoral Commissioner to withdraw from the review.   

In relation to the applications for review, the Commission examined and discussed the 
material before it, including the material provided by the Liberal Party of Australia, the 
National Party of Australia and The New Liberals, and the material before the delegate in 
making the decision under review.  The Commission was satisfied that an assessment of the 
membership list submitted by The New Liberals showed that The New Liberals has at least 
500 members, and that the assessment was made in conformity with the sampling 
methodology endorsed by the Commission.  The Commission concluded, however, that the 
name “The New Liberals” so nearly resembles the name, “Liberal Party of Australia” and/or 
the abbreviation “Liberal” that it is likely to be confused with or mistaken for that name or that 
abbreviation, as the case may be.  Accordingly, the application for registration by The New 
Liberals must be refused pursuant to s 129(1)(d) of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918.  

The Commission decided: 

•  To set aside the decision of the delegate made on 3 June 2021 to register The New 
Liberals (the Party) under Part XI of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (the Act); 
and  

•  To substitute a decision to refuse the application to register the Party as a political 

party under Part XI of the Act; 

•  To take all such steps as are necessary to give effect to the Commission’s decision, 
including to remove the Party from the Register of Political Parties maintained under 
s 125 of the Act.  

Minutes: Australian Electoral Commission Meeting No. 276 

Page 2


--- Page 3 ---

Agenda item 4: Closing 

The Chairperson thanked members for attending and closed the meeting at 5:00pm. 

Minutes: Australian Electoral Commission Meeting No. 276 

Page 3