

--- Page 1 ---

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Friday, 11 March 2022 7:17 PM
Commission Secretariat
Notice under s 134(6)(c) of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (Electoral Act) - 
Australian Federation Party

CAUTION:This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open 
attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe. 

I refer to your reply to my submission on the Australian Federation Party logo.  Although only five have objected to 
the logo, we all appear to agree. 

Logos are placed next to the name or party on the  voting slip.   Voters could easily interpret the tick as the place to 
mark the box.  If a tick is actually put in the box this would invalidate the vote   Alternatively, the correct number 
could be placed in the box because the voter thought the tick indicated this was what should be done. 

I hope that this will be reconsidered.  

Mob: 
Tel: 

1

LEX3070 Released Document No. 13991111Released under the Freedom of Information Act 19821


--- Page 2 ---

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

REDACTION CODES 

Personal Information (name) redacted. 

Personal Information (date of birth) redacted. 

Personal Information (place of birth) redacted 

Personal Information (citizenship) redacted. 

Personal Information (racial or ethnic origin) redacted. 

Personal Information (photograph) redacted 

Personal Information (facsimile of signature) redacted. 

Personal Information (facsimile of manuscript initialling) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individual’s address) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individual’s email address) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s telephone number or mobile number) 
redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s political opinion) redacted. 

Personal Information (opinion about individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individuals current or former occupation). 

Personal Information (employment history) redacted. 

Personal Information (qualifications) redacted. 

Personal Information (membership of a professional or trade association). 

Personal Information (membership of a trade union). 

Personal Information (health) redacted. 

Personal Information (membership of a political association) redacted 

Personal Information (religious beliefs or affiliations) redacted. 

Personal Information (sexual orientation or practices). 

Personal Information (criminal record). 

Personal Information (identifying individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (bank account details) redacted) 

Business information (bank account details) redacted. 

Business information (billing account details) redacted. 

Business information (ureasonably affect a person adversely in respect of his 
or her lawful business or professional affairs) redacted. 

Business Information (reasonably be expected to prejudice the future supply 
of information to the Commonwealth or an agency for the purpose of the 
administration of a law of the Commonwealth or of a Territory or the 
administration of matters administered by an agency). 

30. 

Business information (trade secret).


--- Page 3 ---

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

Business information (information having a commercial value that would be, 
or could reasonably be expected to be, destroyed or diminished if the 
information were disclosed). 

Legal Professional Communication redacted. 

Deliberative material redacted. 

Electoral Roll material redacted. 

Tests, examinations or audits material redacted. 

Management or assessment of personnel material redacted. 

Proper and efficient conduct of the operations of AEC material redacted. 

Lawful methods or procedures for preventing, detecting, investigating, or 
dealing with matters arising out of, breaches or evasions of the law redactged 

39. 

Irrelevant material redacted.