

--- Page 1 ---

Acknowledgement and declaration of key obligations 

Relevant legislation 

■  Archives Act 1983 
■  Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 
■  Crimes Act 1914 

■  Public Service Act 1999 
■  Criminal Code Act 1995 
■  Privacy Act 1988 

■  Work Health and Safety Act 2011 
■  Public Governance, Performance 

and Accountability Act 2013

Privacy statement: The information collected in this document will be used for the purpose of enabling the Australian Electoral 
Commission to carry out its responsibilities as an employer under the Public Service Act 1999, its Enterprise Agreement, the Fair Work Act 
2009, and related Commonwealth employment legislation and taxation law. In addition, certain information is made available in a de-
identified format to the APS Employment Database for reporting purposes 

Acceptance declaration 
Initial each declaration 

I acknowledge that, in recognition of the requirement for political neutrality by the Australian Electoral 
Commission (AEC), a condition of my engagement is to maintain political neutrality during the period of 
my engagement with the AEC. 

I understand that I am required to take reasonable steps to avoid any conflict of interest (real or 
apparent) in connection with my engagement with the AEC. I understand that this requires me to notify 
my manager/supervisor in a timely manner of any circumstance that may give rise to a real or apparent 
conflict of interest, including any other employment I may engage in. 

I declare that I am not currently publicly active in political affairs and do not intend to publicly engage in 
such activities during my engagement with the AEC. Should a situation arise during my engagement 
where I wish to publicly engage in political activities, or where there may be a perception that I am 
involved in political activities, I will discuss the matter with my manager/supervisor immediately. 

I declare that I have not provided false or misleading information or documents, or omitted to provide 
pertinent information or documents, to the AEC or to any other person or organisation acting on behalf 
of the AEC1, in connection with my engagement by the AEC. 

I understand that I am required to take reasonable care for my own health and safety and to take 
reasonable care to ensure my own acts or omissions do not adversely affect other persons. I also 
understand that I am required to follow the AEC's reasonable instructions, policies and procedures on 
Workplace Health and Safety. 

I acknowledge that I have been provided with a list highlighting certain relevant legislation, policies and 
procedures applying to engagement in the Australian Electoral Commission listed in this Declaration 
and that these legislative provisions and policies apply throughout my engagement with the AEC2. 

I acknowledge that it is my responsibility to be familiar with the legislation, policies and procedures 
applying to my work3. 

I acknowledge that these legislative provisions and policies apply throughout my engagement with the 
Australian Electoral Commission. 

I understand my obligation to perform my duties in a manner that ensures the security, integrity and 
accountability of all Ballot Papers that are in my possession or with which I may come into contact. 

Staff member 

Full name 

Signature 

Signature witness 

Full name 

Signature 

Date 

 / 

 / 

Date 

 / 

 / 

1 This includes persons or organisations conducting health, security or character checks on behalf of the AEC. 
2  This list (overleaf) is not exhaustive. 
3 For APS employees, Public Service Regulation 3.16 requires that “Each APS employee must inform him or herself about the Public 
Service Act, [the] Regulations and the Public Service Commissioner’s Directions”.


--- Page 2 ---

Legal provisions and policies 

The following are key legal provisions and policies that 
apply to engagement with the AEC. It is the individual’s 
responsibility to familiarise themselves and keep up to 
date with the legislation, policies and procedures 
applying to their work. 

1.  The APS Values, APS Employment Principles and 

Code of Conduct 

3.  Specific provisions applying to the work of the AEC 

as reflected in policy  

Relevant documents provided as attachment to this 
Declaration 

■  Declaring conflict of interest with regard to 

employment in the AEC 

■  Political neutrality 
■  Ballot Paper Principles 
■  Gifts, hospitality and other benefits 
■  Outside employment 
■  Employment of friends and family. 

■  Part 3, Section 10, section 10A and section 13 of 

the Public Service Act 1999 

4.  Other criminal offences 

2.  Government information and privacy  

■  Public Service Regulation 2.1 (PS Act s13): which 

imposes a duty not to disclose information 
obtained or generated in connection with 
employment 

■  The Privacy Act 1988, in particular the Information 

Privacy Principles 
■  The Archives Act 1983 
■  The Crimes Act 1914, in particular section 70: 
disclosure of information by Commonwealth 
officers, and section 79: official secrets 

■  The Criminal Code Act 1995 sets out a range of 
offences relevant to AEC employees, including 
abuse of public office and unauthorised access to, 
or modification of, restricted data held in a 
Commonwealth computer to which access is 
restricted by an access control system. 

■  Under s14 of the Public Governance, 

Performance and Accountability Act 2013 it is a 
criminal offence for an official to misapply, or 
improperly dispose of or use, public money 
■  The Criminal Code Act 1995 creates a range of 
offences, including theft, fraud, abuse of public 
office and bribery. 

5.  Financial management accountability 

■  AEC’s Accountable Authority Instructions. 

6.  Other policies 

■  The AEC’s policies on email and internet usage, 
security, privacy, respect at work and conflict of 
interest can be found on the AEC intranet.

AEC Ballot Paper Principles 

Expected behaviours to uphold the Ballot Paper Principles 

Professionalism 

  Understand your obligations relating to 
the security, integrity and accountability 
of the Ballot Paper Principles, and 
related work 

  Maintain the currency of your 

knowledge, and complete required 
learning and development 

  Create and maintain complete and 

accurate records in a timely manner 

Agility 

  Respond to changing circumstances 
with a view to achieving a positive 
outcome 

  Appropriately raise a concern about an 
issue of non-compliance when you 
become aware of it 

Quality 

  Comply with established systems and 

processes 

  Ensure that every task is completed: 

o  Fully and accurately 
o  When it is required 
o 
In the manner that is required 
o  To the standard that is required 
  Ensure currency and completeness of 
materials used or products created 

  Store materials and information 
appropriately and securely