

--- Page 1 ---

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

Kristen Wild
Vanessa Teague
andrewstvcount@greatcactus.org; Tom Rogers; Thomas Ryan
RE: Corrections to the Senate Counting algorithm [SEC=OFFICIAL]
Tuesday, 19 October 2021 11:28:00 AM
18 10 2021 - Dr Andrew Conway and Prof. Vanessa teague - Senate Counting and Scrutiny.pdf
image001.gif
image002.gif
image003.jpg

Good morning

Please find the attached response from Mr Rogers.

Regards
Kristen

Kristen Wild | Personal Assistant to the Commissioner
Executive Leadership Team
Australian Electoral Commission

From: Vanessa Teague <Vanessa.Teague@anu.edu.au> 
Sent: Tuesday, 31 August 2021 3:40 PM
To: Tom Rogers 
Cc: andrewstvcount@greatcactus.org
Subject: Corrections to the Senate Counting algorithm

; Thomas Ryan 

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links
or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.

Dear Mr Rogers and Mr Ryan,

Please find attached our report on the AEC's Senate count.

We have found one instance in which the software breaks ties in a way that is not what is
specified in the Electoral Act. We have also noted some other ambiguities that need to be
resolved either by amending the Act or by otherwise committing to the exact counting
algorithm.

We would be very happy to help you correct the code - you can see our implementation here
https://github.com/AndrewConway/ConcreteSTV.  We could easily make the necessary
adjustments to the official code if it was similarly published online.

Also, we support recent proposals to audit randomly selected paper ballots at the end of the
digitizing process to give everyone evidence of the accuracy of the process. We would be
happy to help the AEC implement these measures securely and transparently.

Yours Sincerely,

Vanessa Teague and Andrew Conway.

Vanessa Teague


--- Page 2 ---

CEO, Thinking Cybersecurity Pty. Ltd.

A/Prof (Adj.), Research School of Computer Science
The Australian National University | Canberra ACT 2601
E: vanessa.teague@anu.edu.au

W: https://researchers.anu.edu.au/researchers/teague-v

CRICOS Provider #00120C