

--- Page 1 ---

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

EIAT

 EIAT

RE: For Advice: Twitter Meeting Availability. [SEC=OFFICIAL:Sensitive]
Monday, 23 January 2023 2:18:48 PM
image005.jpg
image001.gif
image002.gif

Good afternoon 
I am looking to follow up on my colleague 
with the Australian Electoral Commission to further discuss Twitter’s referral process and support
accurate electoral information on the platform. As mentioned in 
 previous email our social
media team, along with other colleagues, would be grateful to be included in a meeting as well.
I appreciate this is likely a busy time for you. I have updated the potential dates that may work for us,
however would of course be open to discussing alternatives.

email and discuss a suitable time for a short meeting

Monday 6 February: anytime 2pm onwards.
Tuesday 7 February: anytime 2pm onwards
Wednesday 8 February: 9am to 10am, 2pm – 3pm
Friday 10 February: anytime 2pm onwards.

*Canberra AEDT time

If you have any questions please don’t hesitate to contact us and we would be glad to discuss them
with you.
Kind regards,

| Project Officer

Defending Democracy Unit | Electoral Integrity and Communications Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

From: EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au> 
Sent: Tuesday, 10 January 2023 2:04 PM
To: 
Cc: 

; EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au>

Subject: RE: For Advice: Twitter Meeting Availability. [SEC=OFFICIAL:Sensitive]
Dear 
Wishing you a happy new year.
As foreshadowed by our email below, we would be grateful to meet for a catch up, including with
colleagues from our social media team.
Below are dates that would work for us, please let us know your preference:

Monday 6 February: anytime between 9am to 12pm, 2pm onwards.
Tuesday 7 February: 2pm – 3pm
Wednesday 8 February: 9am to 10am, 2pm – 3pm
Friday 10 February: anytime between 9am to 12pm, 2pm onwards.

*Canberra AEDT time

If none of these dates suit, please let me know of alternatives and I’ll work on finding a suitable time.
We are happy to meet virtually on Microsoft Teams, but also more than happy to organise a meeting
room here in Canberra if you were in town on the date in question.
Looking forward to hearing back from you,
Kind regards,

 | Senior Project Officer

Defending Democracy Unit | Electoral Integrity and Communications Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

From: 

Section 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fs 47fs 47f


--- Page 2 ---

Sent: Tuesday, 29 November 2022 8:45 PM
To: 
Cc: media <media@aec.gov.au>
Subject: RE: AEC and Twitter [SEC=OFFICIAL:Sensitive]
Many thanks 
We will try and coordinate around leave of key people on our side and get you an invite shortly.
Kind regards

 EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au>

 | Director

Defending Democracy Unit | Electoral Integrity and Communications Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

; media <media@aec.gov.au>

From: 
Sent: Monday, 28 November 2022 8:48 PM
To: EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au>
Cc: 
Subject: Re: AEC and Twitter [SEC=OFFICIAL:Sensitive]
CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links
or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.
Dear 
Many thanks for reaching out. Great to be connected with you and the team. I had an extensive
handover period with 
collaborative relationship between Twitter and the AEC. I look forward to continuing that engagement.
Confirming that the existing arrangements for escalating legal requests and reports for potential
breaches of our Twitter Rules remain in place. Feel free to reach out if you have any additional
questions.
It would be great to touch base early in the New Year. I'm back on deck the 3rd of Jan and am away the
last week of Jan.
Looking forward to speakin in the New Year.
Warm regards,

before she departed for Canva and was briefed on the productive and

On Sat, Nov 26, 2022 at 11:44 AM EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au> wrote:

Dear 
We understand you are now our appropriate contact at Twitter Australia. We thought it would be
good to reach out to you and confirm your contact details and our work together.
We note that Twitter is undergoing significant changes at present, but we welcome the opportunity
to confirm our continued referral processes in the support of maintaining accurate electoral
information and authorisations consistent with Australian law. For some background, you will see
attached referral documentation we used together in the context of the recent 2022 federal
election.
We propose having a more detailed catch up in the new year with relevant colleagues here in the
AEC and from your team. In the meantime, please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any
questions regarding the Australian Electoral Commission, Australian federal elections more broadly
and the proposed referendum.
We look forward to working with you.
Regards

 | Assistant Director

Defending Democracy Unit | Electoral Integrity and Communications Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

--

Section 47fSection 47fSection 47Section 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fs 47f


--- Page 3 ---

