

--- Page 1 ---




--- Page 2 ---

with advanced notice. The date will be formalised by the issuing of a writ by the Governor-General, which is the 
formal instruction to the AEC to conduct a poll. 

AEC Information campaign launched: 

In April, the AEC launched our referendum information campaign. This initial stage of the campaign is centred 
around ‘early-education’ providing information to educate voters on federal referendums. Please see our media 
release available here.  

As we move through the referendum timeline in the coming months, our campaigns will continue to gradually 
change focuses, including topics such as enrolment and voter services (how/where voters can cast their vote).  

Throughout the campaign, the AEC will be engaging in digital advertising and media outreach, as well as working 
with community groups and other stakeholders, to educate voters on referendums. The AEC will be directing voters 
towards our dedicated referendum sub-site at https://www.aec.gov.au/referendums/ for further information.  

We will look to keep you updated with key milestones as our communication campaign progresses.  

Referendum resources: 

As part of the campaign, we have also launched a number of referendum resources, including our Referendum 
disinformation register, which will list prominent pieces of disinformation relating to the referendum process, the 
correct information, and any action taken by the AEC. Importantly, the disinformation register focuses solely on mis 
and disinformation about the referendum process. The AEC does not have a role in fact-checking claims about the 
'Yes' or 'No' campaigns for the referendum, though we are responsible for distribution of a ‘yes/no’ pamphlet to 
each household where there is an enrolled voter. Content for the booklet is provided by parliamentarians 
representing each side, and published verbatim by the AEC. 

The AEC has also made available a number of Electoral backgrounders. These backgrounders communicate 
referendum and electoral law, particularly in relation to referendum and electoral offences, in relatively plain 
English for the information and guidance of interested persons. These backgrounders are not intended to substitute 
a careful reading of the legislation. Rather, they are published for general information only and should not be relied 
upon for any particular purpose.  

I would encourage you all to familiarise yourself with the information on our referendum sub-site, and of course, if 
you have any questions, please don’t hesitate to contact us at EIAT@aec.gov.au.  

We will soon be in contact to discuss suitable times for a meeting with the Electoral Integrity Assurance Taskforce.  

Kind regards,  

 | Director  

Defending Democracy Unit | Electoral Integrity and Communications Branch 

Australian Electoral Commission 

T: 

2

s 47Fs 47F