

--- Page 1 ---

THE HON PETER DUTTON MP 
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION 

Mr Tom Rogers 
Electoral Commissioner 
Australian Electoral Commission 
10 Mort St  
CANBERRA ACT 2600 

via email: tom.rogers@aec.gov.au  

Dear Commissioner, 

We are writing to express our serious concerns in relation to how the Australian 
Electoral Commission intends to assess the formality of votes at the upcoming 
referendum.  

In the referendum, Australians will be asked to write ‘yes’ or ‘no’ on the ballot paper. 
A ballot paper will also be counted as a formal vote if the voter’s intention is clear – 
for example, s 93(9) of the Referendum (Machinery Provisions) Act 1984 makes 
clear that a “Y” will count as a yes and a “N” will be accepted as a no.  

However, the Scrutineers Handbook published in July 2023 goes much further than 
the example provided above. The handbook indicates that while a tick will likely be 
treated by the AEC as a ‘yes’ vote, a cross on its own is considered by the AEC to 
be ambiguous, and therefore will be treated as informal. 

With the greatest of respect, this approach is fundamentally lopsided. It risks 
distorting the national vote. 

Australians expect the AEC to act fairly and impartially in the execution of its duties. 
Counting a tick as a formal vote while simultaneously excluding a cross as informal 
could artificially skew the count towards the yes vote, and fail to accurately reflect the 
will of the Australian people.


--- Page 2 ---

We understand that the AEC’s current approach is broadly consistent with the 
approach that it has adopted in previous referendums. However, just because the 
AEC has adopted this approach before, does not mean that it is appropriate or 
legally correct.  

Given the AEC’s purported reliance on legal advice from the Attorney-General’s 
Department in reaching this view, the AEC should release this advice so the 
Australian public can properly consider the AEC’s position. We note that any legal 
professional privilege that existed in the legal advice has clearly been waived by the 
AEC through its public statements about the advice over many years.  

More importantly, we call on you to reconsider the AEC’s approach. If a tick counts 
for yes, a cross should count for no. To do otherwise gives the yes case an unfair 
advantage, and has the potential to undermine the impartiality and fairness of the 
referendum. 

It is, after all, in the interests of every Australian to ensure that this basic standard of 
fairness is applied. 

Yours sincerely 

PETER DUTTON 

MICHAELIA CASH 

24 August 2023