

--- Page 1 ---

EIAT
Thursday, 1 June 2023 10:11 AM

EIAT; Social Media; Authorisation Section
RE: [External] FW: Onboarding successful - TikTok Safety Enforcement Tool [SEC=OFFICIAL]

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Hi 

Thanks for your email. I’ve spoken with the AEC’s Media and Digital Engagement team, and we’re wondering if 
Monday 19 June at 10:00am would be a suitable time to meet and discuss TikTok’s on-platform referendum guide?  

Additionally, as you may be aware, the Speaker of the House of Representatives recently announced that a by-
election, for the federal electoral division of Fadden, has been called with voting day to be held on Saturday 15 July 
2023. The Electoral Integrity Assurance Taskforce will again provide assurance to the Australian Electoral 
Commissioner, and the Australian public, on the integrity of this electoral event.  Hoping you can confirm that 
TikTok’s Safety Enforcement Tool (TSET) is the best pathway should we need to refer content and that 

 have been whitelisted to access 

the tool?  
When we last spoke on the phone, you offered to facilitate a short meeting between the AEC and your Trust and 
Safety team for a brief tutorial on how to use TSET. We’d be interested in taking you up on this offer and wondering 
if Thursday 15 June at 11am would work for your team?  

Happy to discuss these meetings further.  

Kind regards,  

 | Project Officer  

Defending Democracy Unit | Electoral Integrity and Communications Branch 
Australian Electoral Commission 
T: 

From: 
Sent: Tuesday, May 30, 2023 10:48 AM 
To: EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au> 
Subject: Re: [External] FW: Onboarding successful - TikTok Safety Enforcement Tool [SEC=OFFICIAL] 

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open 
attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.  

Hi 

Hope you have been well.  

Just following up on when might be possible to meet (with 
communications/PSAs/hub for the Referendum?  

 team) regarding on-platform 

1

s 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47FSection 47E(d)


--- Page 2 ---

Cheers 

On Thu, May 18, 2023 at 12:14 PM EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au> wrote: 

Hi 

,  

Hoping you’re well and thank you for acknowledging receipt of our Regulatory Law teams letter 
week.  

shared last 

Recently, we received confirmation that you’ve transitioned to TikTok's Safety Enforcement Tool (TSET). I’m looking 
to confirm if 
access the tool?  

 are the AEC emails with 

Happy to discuss if you have any questions or concerns.  

Kind regards,  

 | Project Officer  

Defending Democracy Unit | Electoral Integrity and Communications Branch 

Australian Electoral Commission 

T: 

From: 
Sent: Wednesday, May 10, 2023 2:51 PM 
To: Defending Democracy Unit <DefendingDemocracyUnit@aec.gov.au>; 

Subject: FW: Onboarding successful - TikTok Safety Enforcement Tool [SEC=OFFICIAL] 

Hi folks,  

2

s 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47FSection 47E(d)


--- Page 3 ---

We’ve received the attached user manual for a TikTok safety enforcement tool yesterday arvo. Unsure what it 
relates to but if you’ve been working with them on providing access can you please let them know that
our social media head honcho?  

 is now 

Thanks and kind regards, 

 | Senior Media Officer 

Assistant Director | Media & Digital Engagement 

Australian Electoral Commission 

T: 

From: 
Sent: Tuesday, 9 May 2023 4:56 PM 
To: Social Media <socialmedia@aec.gov.au>; 
Cc: 
Subject: Onboarding successful - TikTok Safety Enforcement Tool 

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open 
attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.  

Good afternoon, 

I'm writing to let you know that the Australian Electoral Commission has been successfully on-boarded onto 
TikTok's Safety Enforcement Tool (TSET). 

TSET is TikTok's secure web portal designed to enable our Government partners to easily submit and review 
content takedown requests. Going forward, you can submit requests through the TSET portal rather than using the 
 email address. This will enable you to easily track the progress of your agency's ongoing and 

completed requests, and provides you with direct access to our dedicated Trust & Safety teams.  

3

s 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47G(1)


--- Page 4 ---

