

--- Page 1 ---

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce, Inc. <norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com>
Wednesday, 15 January 2025 8:27 PM
Legal Services Mailbox; Jeff Pope; 
2025 Australian Federal elections - for urgent attention - Reply Requested
Submission to Governance Committee re Preamble     16th September 2024.pdf; Submission to 
Governance Committee re Preamble   ADDENDUM    16th September 2024.pdf; Attachment No. 
1  Preamble CEM_Redacted  Sussan Ley.pdf; Attachment No. 1A   2.03a Preamble Attachment Ae 
CEM.pdf; Attachment No. 1B   2.04 United Nations CEM_Redacted.pdf; Attachment No. 2  for 
Chamber submission Preamble NIGC - Sept2024   FINAL.pdf; Attachment No. 3   QV Royal 
Warrant Dec1856.pdf; Chamber letter to Australian Electoral Commission  Jan2025 .pdf

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or 
open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.  

Dear Australian Electoral Commission, 

Attached is a letter for your immediate attention and action. 
Please note a copy of this email has also gone to the Governor-General 

Kind regards 
Chamber Committee 
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce 

 M

m  

  m 

Disclaimer 
This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged material. Any review, disclosure, dissemination, 
re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance upon this information is prohibited without Chamber Committee approval in writing.  
If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission including any attachments

1

s 22s 22


--- Page 2 ---

DEPARTMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE, REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND CITIES 

2.03 Preamble to the Norfolk Island Act 1979 

Key Issues Brief 

Key Issues 

 

 

 

In May 2018, the Norfolk Island Mayor, Councillor Robin Adams, publicly stated she will 
undertake a consultation process with the community and the Australian Government to 
reinstate the preamble (Attachment A) into the Norfolk Island Act 1979 (Cth) (the NI Act) 
as a means of protecting and enhancing the unique culture, heritage, traditions and 
environment of the Norfolk Island people.   

The preamble was repealed from the NI Act by the Australian Government in 2015 as it 
was considered to be a necessary step for cultural inclusion, and disengagement of the 
Pitcairn stronghold and cultural exclusion that had previously occurred.  

Any revised preamble must be succinct, historically accurate, and inclusive to reflect the 
multicultural nature of the community of Norfolk Island today. 

  When the Hon Dr John McVeigh MP, former Minister for Infrastructure, Regional 

Development and Cities, met with the Council of Elders, the preamble was raised.  He 
requested that the Council of Elders support the Mayor in working with the Administrator 
to develop a proposed preamble for broad consultation.  The Administrator has advised 
that the Mayor has held discussions with the Council of Elders.   

 

You may wish to:  

o 

o 

seek an update on the Mayor’s meeting with the Council of Elders; and 

advise that the Australian Government is committed to protecting Norfolk Island’s 
culture and heritage, for example: 

 

 

Background 

Norf’k is an official language of Norfolk Island and the curriculum at Norfolk 
Island Central School includes classes in the Norf’k language and culture; and 

Norfolk Island’s public holidays have been maintained. 

 

 

 

The NI Act previously contained a preamble that included a statement about the special 
relationship of Pitcairn Island descendants with Norfolk Island and their desire to preserve 
their traditions and culture. 

The Advisory Council established to represent the Norfolk Island community before the 
commencement of NIRC consulted the Norfolk Island community on a proposed new 
preamble. However, community feedback was divided. 

In February 2016, the Advisory Council recommended to the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, the 
then Minister for Territories, Local Government and Major Projects, that the matter of a 
preamble should be further considered by NIRC. 

2.03 Key Issues Brief – Preamble to the Norfolk Island Act 1979 

Page 1 of 2


--- Page 3 ---

DEPARTMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE, REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND CITIES 

Sensitivities 

 

This issue may be raised by NIRC or members of the community during your visit.  

Attachments: 

A  Preamble 

2.03 Key Issues Brief – Preamble to the Norfolk Island Act 1979 

Page 2 of 2


--- Page 4 ---

Norfolk Island Act 1979 

Act No. 25 of 1979 as amended 

This compilation was prepared on 16 March 2004 
taking into account amendments up to Act No. 6 of 2004 

The text of any of those amendments not in force 
on that date is appended in the Notes section 

The operation of amendments that have been incorporated may be 
affected by application provisions that are set out in the Notes section 

Prepared by the Office of Legislative Drafting, 
Attorney-General’s Department, Canberra 

2.03a Preamble Attachment Ae.docx 26/06/2018 7:22 PM


--- Page 5 ---

An Act to provide for the government of Norfolk 
Island 

  WHEREAS by an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, 

made and passed in the sixth and seventh years of the reign of Her 
Majesty Queen Victoria intituled “An Act to amend so much of an 
Act of the last Session, for the Government of New South Wales 
and Van Diemen’s Land, as relates to Norfolk Island,” it was, 
amongst other things, enacted that it should be lawful for Her 
Majesty, by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of the United 
Kingdom, to sever Norfolk Island from the Government of New 
South Wales and to annex it to the Government and Colony of Van 
Diemen’s Land: 

  AND WHEREAS Her Majesty Queen Victoria, in exercise of the 
powers vested in Her by the said Act, by a Commission under the 
Great Seal of the United Kingdom bearing date the twenty-fourth 
day of October, 1843, appointed that from and after the 
twenty-ninth day of September, 1844, Norfolk Island should be 
severed from the Government of New South Wales and annexed to 
the Government and Colony of Van Diemen’s Land: 

  AND WHEREAS by an Act of the Parliament of the United 

Kingdom, called the Australian Waste Lands Act 1855, it was, 
amongst other things, provided that it should be lawful for Her 
Majesty at any time, by Order in Council, to separate Norfolk 
Island from the Colony of Van Diemen’s Land and to make such 
provision for the Government of Norfolk Island as might seem 
expedient: 

  AND WHEREAS on 8 June 1856 persons who had previously 

inhabited Pitcairn Island settled on Norfolk Island: 

  AND WHEREAS by an Order in Council dated the twenty-fourth 

day of June, 1856, made by Her Majesty in pursuance of the 
last-mentioned Act, it was ordered and declared, amongst other 
things, that from and after the date of the proclamation of the Order 
in New South Wales Norfolk Island should be thereby separated 
from the said Colony of Van Diemen’s Land (now called 
Tasmania) and that from that date all power, authority, and 
jurisdiction of the Governor, Legislature, Courts of Justice, and 
Magistrates of Tasmania over Norfolk Island should cease and 

2.03a Preamble Attachment Ae.docx 26/06/2018 7:22 PM


--- Page 6 ---

determine, and that from the said date Norfolk Island should be a 
distinct and separate Settlement, the affairs of which should until 
further Order in that behalf by Her Majesty be administered by a 
Governor to be for that purpose appointed by Her Majesty with the 
advice and consent of Her Privy Council: and it was thereby 
further ordered that the Governor and Commander-in-Chief for the 
time being of the Colony of New South Wales should be, and he 
thereby was, constituted Governor of Norfolk Island, with the 
powers and authorities in the said Order mentioned: 

  AND WHEREAS the said Order in Council was proclaimed in 

New South Wales on 1 November 1856: 

  AND WHEREAS by an Order in Council dated the fifteenth day of 
January, 1897, made in pursuance of the said last-mentioned Act, 
Her Majesty, after reciting that it was expedient that other 
provision should be made for the government of Norfolk Island, 
and that, in prospect of the future annexation of Norfolk Island to 
the Colony of New South Wales or to any Federal body of which 
that Colony might thereafter form part, in the meantime the affairs 
of Norfolk Island should be administered by the Governor of New 
South Wales as therein provided, was pleased to revoke the said 
Order in Council of the twenty-fourth day of June, One thousand 
eight hundred and fifty-six, and to order that the affairs of Norfolk 
Island should thenceforth, and until further Order should be made 
in that behalf by Her Majesty, be administered by the Governor 
and Commander-in-Chief for the time being of the Colony of New 
South Wales and its Dependencies: 

  AND WHEREAS the said Order in Council was published in the 
New South Wales Government Gazette on 19 March 1897, and 
took effect at that date: 

  AND WHEREAS by an Order in Council dated the eighteenth day 
of October, One thousand nine hundred, made in pursuance of the 
said last mentioned Act, Her Majesty was pleased to revoke the 
said Order in Council of the fifteenth day of January, One thousand 
eight hundred and ninety-seven, and to order that the affairs of 
Norfolk Island should thenceforth, and until further Order should 
be made in that behalf by Her Majesty, be administered by the 
Governor for the time being of the State of New South Wales and 
its Dependencies: 

Norfolk Island Act 1979                    2


--- Page 7 ---

AND WHEREAS the said Order in Council was published in the 
New South Wales Government Gazette on 1 January 1901, and 
took effect at that date: 

  AND WHEREAS by an Order in Council dated the 30th day of 

March, 1914, His Majesty King George V, by virtue and in 
exercise of the power in that behalf by the said last-mentioned Act 
or otherwise in His Majesty vested, after reciting that the 
Parliament had passed an Act No. 15 of 1913, entitled “An Act to 
provide for the acceptance of Norfolk Island as a territory under 
the authority of the Commonwealth, and for the government 
thereof” and that it was expedient that the said Order in Council of 
18th of October, 1900, should be revoked and that Norfolk Island 
should be placed under the authority of the Commonwealth of 
Australia, was pleased to revoke the said Order in Council of 18th 
of October, 1900, and to order that Norfolk Island be placed under 
the authority of the Commonwealth of Australia: 

  AND WHEREAS the said Order in Council was published in the 
Gazette on 17 June 1914, and took effect from 1 July 1914, being 
the date of commencement of the Norfolk Island Act 1913: 

  AND WHEREAS Norfolk Island was, by the Norfolk Island Act 

1913, declared to be accepted by the Commonwealth as a Territory 
under the authority of the Commonwealth: 

  AND WHEREAS Norfolk Island has been governed by the 

Commonwealth initially under the provisions of the Norfolk Island 
Act 1913, and subsequently under the provisions of the Norfolk 
Island Act 1957: 

  AND WHEREAS the residents of Norfolk Island include 

descendants of the settlers from Pitcairn Island: 

  AND WHEREAS the Parliament recognises the special 

relationship of the said descendants with Norfolk Island and their 
desire to preserve their traditions and culture: 

  AND WHEREAS the Parliament considers it to be desirable and to 

be the wish of the people of Norfolk Island that Norfolk Island 
achieve, over a period of time, internal self-government as a 
Territory under the authority of the Commonwealth and, to that 
end, to provide, among other things, for the establishment of a 

Norfolk Island Act 1979                    3


--- Page 8 ---

representative Legislative Assembly and of other separate political 
and administrative institutions on Norfolk Island: 

  AND WHEREAS the Parliament intends that within a period of 5 
years after the coming into operation of this Act consideration will 
be given to extending the powers conferred by or under this Act on 
the Legislative Assembly and the other political and administrative 
institutions of Norfolk Island, and that provision be made in this 
Act to enable the results of such consideration to be implemented: 

  BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Queen, and the Senate and 
House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, as 
follows: 

Norfolk Island Act 1979                    4


--- Page 9 ---

A preamble usually provides a context for the legislation itself.  While it may 
contain a number of statements of fact or statements of intent (or of “good 
intentions”), it is not binding in any legal sense.  It therefore could not affect the 
constitutional relationship between the Commonwealth and a self-governing 
Territory such as Norfolk Island.  

Norfolk Island Act 1979                    5


--- Page 10 ---

DEPARTMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE, REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND CITIES 

Key Issues Brief 

2.04 Petition to the United Nations (UN) 

Key Issues 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In April 2016, Geoffrey Robertson QC, acting on behalf of the Norfolk Island People for 
Democracy (NIPD), submitted a petition to the Chair of the UN General Assembly’s 
Fourth Committee (the Special Political and Decolonisation Committee) requesting 
Norfolk Island be inscribed on the UN’s list of non-self-governing territories.  

The UN list of non-self-governing territories identifies territories that the UN General 
Assembly deems to be "non-self-governing" and subject to a decolonisation process.  

The UN has not scheduled time to consider the petition.  

Advice from the Attorney-General’s Department is that Norfolk Island does not meet the 
UN’s criteria for inscription as a non-self-governing territory.  

People from Norfolk Island have previously petitioned the UN for recognition as a 
non-self-governing territory (in 1977 and 1994) without success.  

On 8 June 2018, the Council of Elders announced in the Norfolk Islander newspaper that it 
has contracted ‘Expert Advisory Services’ to carry out a Self-Governance Assessment of 
Norfolk Island and to draft a UN General Assembly resolution to expedite the review of 
their petition. This work was expected to be completed by the end of August 2018 but the 
Department has not had any information to indicate this has occurred.  

Background: 

NIPD 

 

 

NIPD was established in June 2015 with the aim of having Norfolk Island inscribed on the 
UN’s list of non-self-governing territories.  

It is difficult to gauge the true level of support for NIPD on Norfolk Island. The group 
claim to have over 1,000 supporters (likely to include visitors to the Island) and to be 
representing the majority of views. NIPD’s fundraising methods and affiliations, however, 
have been the subject of some concern and scrutiny in public forums.  

Process for Inscription 

 

 

The UN General Assembly must approve any addition of a territory to the list of non-self-
governing territories. This can follow a recommendation made by the Special Committee 
on Decolonisation (also known as the Committee of 24, or C24) which monitors and 
reviews the list of non-self-governing territories. 

Alternatively, a draft resolution may be proposed before the UN General Assembly by a 
Member State. NIPD would need to obtain the sponsorship of a Member State to the UN to 
put forward the draft resolution to the UN General Assembly plenary.  

2.04 Petition to the United Nations (UN) 

Page 1 of 2


--- Page 11 ---

DEPARTMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE, REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND CITIES 

 

Passage of the resolution would rely on the support of a simple majority of UN Member 
States present and voting. This would likely require extensive lobbying by NIPD and the 
sponsoring Member State. The Department of Infrastructure, Regional Development and 
Cities (the Department) is aware of lobbying by NIPD in New Zealand and the UK. 

Sensitivities: If none just note ‘Nil’ 

  Since June 2016, NIPD has been staging a sit-in protest at the Old Military Barracks. The 

protest presents a risk to the heritage values of the site.  

  The Department is also aware of an alleged complaint lodged by Mr Albert Buffett, President 

of the Council of Elders, to the UN’s Human Rights Committee claiming the Australian 
Government has breached its international human rights obligations.  

  The Australian Government has received no official notification about this complaint from the 
UN. If a complaint is made Australia will generally have six months, from notification, to 
respond. 

Attachments: Nil 

2.04 Petition to the United Nations (UN) 

Page 2 of 2


--- Page 12 ---

Letter     

19th May 1856.


--- Page 13 ---

Letter for Order to draft Instructions


--- Page 14 ---

24th June 1856   

--- Letter,   Instructions  with Royal Seal top left


--- Page 15 ---




--- Page 16 ---

August 1856 

Trade and Foreign Affairs 

Seal at attached top left corner


--- Page 17 ---




--- Page 18 ---

a a te ae, ey wd fur Uf ae,” or 9
— ‘ a

-

-

ke oe i NGF AEE PIO

-
-

eS eer

0)
Ss? ed ee =
so a

ee
“¢ -

— ower

a
eres
—_

F = ie ee - ;
Me ait = yr vem norsr @

, ti ww
: = Pat
2

(yo ee ae a eae

,
>> . J I " . ~- »
> PNP OD ES my PF oe P Pg
Y wT

—_

-_ — 7
CP BPR tern asi? Z

ore . “ery 272 Pea - +n ey -
— a

= eS

—

SO w-me
a

—

SEP PS as it oe — ee
“< - .

—_

te m-> ett tn! ed
— 2 as , PLD A ey 2s
: ’ ‘ = $ ~
. “ ~ - Pd - = , r
"Ky
Pty > “Ay 2s. o> as . a
ln as as > -
- a OF Fe f
“ 7
c
RIDPPP I DG”? 23
Gc
“> “Lye Py >> ¥ .
. } ;
é -
.>
- “ys
od
» , -
© LZ = - *- " A,
~ ”
-
> " Wo AS ZF ~~ - A
i ye

L8e

ho


--- Page 19 ---

XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX


--- Page 20 ---

Ganley asleep

the Prato dnl be (olor of

G

j J

285

he ange f-

Afi dedoke ond |
Withelived’ dhe Leveser
T Our a AW ected
Me Attlee
se otis
me ary rt recoure
Gur Br dew for Le |
mae’ oy aw
Cobh Nepolt Salaca, |
ew Wao ensue}


--- Page 21 ---




--- Page 22 ---

of af

pis fo A sy277, : type WY /
A

AG 7} YO 7 TUS 4
J

: / Pi OY % i i —— K

*E/
A
i

Yuan 4, * Jlenpipge 70due pafy :

Cs
wee

pau swifazs JeiUeye?Z, ay, re yoy fo Aropry, , “yf 4) py

aiiDe Y/ ty Y Pevt Yy pp woh P?Y) prob y Wap {> pun

¢ Bin
Cie “77 Py 7-7, fas fy” - a er ber seth Yh, if >20f°
Kee

Yi 9 wf 7p v tons MIsVY YY pbb syp Jo prunog “

hyetoy MRF fo “Pi PPrgue “yf? nok oy JPME DIY “ Pan ae

ey fo PUPIMNE Prez 7y/ ty pyppnp a

 

"

7


--- Page 23 ---




--- Page 24 ---




--- Page 25 ---




--- Page 26 ---




--- Page 27 ---

Following found in 

Australian government documentation files 

May be hard to see --- a SEAL at top left of the document


--- Page 28 ---

Maybe hard to see –a SEAL at top left corner of the document


--- Page 29 ---




--- Page 30 ---

SEAL at top left of document


--- Page 31 ---

Order of Her Majesty 24 June 1856


--- Page 32 ---




--- Page 33 ---




--- Page 34 ---




--- Page 35 ---




--- Page 36 ---

Dated:  13 June 1913 

Note:   Imperial Legislation is necessary for both annexation and administration 

can be vested in the Commonwealth Government.


--- Page 37 ---




--- Page 38 ---

GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S O1
- ‘Melbourne, 15th ang


--- Page 39 ---

Hansard 

"Mr FENTON: 

Maribyrnong 

Norfolk Island Bill 1913 

– I understand that Norfolk Island was previously under the Government of New South Wales, 
and I desire to know whether I am correct in assuming that that Government has practically said 
in effect to the Commonwealth, “ We do not desire to control this island any longer, and we shall 
be glad if you will take it over. 

Mr Groom: 

– The New South Wales Government is acquiescing in our taking it over, so that there will be no 
difficulty in that regard." 

Misinformation! -  

Norfolk Island was "never" under the Government of NSW!  

Nor did the NSW Government ever play a role in "administering" Norfolk Island... 

The Norfolk Island Order in Council of 1900 confirms this. 

1. The affairs of Norfolk Island shall henceforth and until further Order  

is made in that behalf by Her Majesty, be administered by THE GOVERNOR for  

the time being of the State of New South Wales and its Dependencies.  

The title “the Governor” shall include the Officer for the time being administering  

the Government of New South Wales.  

2. The Governor shall keep and use the public Seal of Norfolk Island for  

sealing all things that shall pass the said Seal.  

No involvement or administering power was ever given to "the Government" of NSW!....only the 
appointed British Governor of the State of NSW. 

These mistakes should NEVER happen when peoples lives are at the hands of those making 
decisions!


--- Page 40 ---

IN REPLY
PLEASE QUOTE

wo 14/ Syst:

 

4
IGAPRi94y
ORNEY GENERAL

DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

Melbourne, 15th April, 1914.

The Secretary,

Attorney-General's Department.

t attach copy of the laws of Norfolk
Islend and invite attention to Section 3 of
the Proclamation on page 7661.

2. The Department is asked to advise
whether it is permissible for aliens to hold
freeholé lands in the Island. I see nothing
in any of the particular laws referring to the
matter and assume, therefore, that under the
Section mentioned the common lew woulda preveil..
tT understand the effect of that law to be that
aliens cannot hold freehold.

3s I shall be gled to be informed whether

that impression is correct.

(2 f f ek dh oe

Secretary.


--- Page 41 ---




--- Page 42 ---




--- Page 43 ---




--- Page 44 ---




--- Page 45 ---

pale
ee

Fre


--- Page 46 ---

Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce  

For immediate attention 

Mr Jeff Pope 
Acting Electoral Commissioner 
Australian Electoral Commission 
Australia 

Australian Elections 2025 

Dear Acting Commissioner, 

Members of the Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce (Chamber) have requested the 
Chamber Committee to communicate with you in relation to the Commonwealth of 
Australia Federal Elections scheduled to be held in 2025. 

It is extremely important for the Australian Elections Commission to understand, 
accept and acknowledge publicly that indigenous Norfolk Islanders (born on Norfolk 
Island) are not Australia citizens and that under law, including international law the 
Commonwealth of Australia has no authority, claim, or administration rights on 
Norfolk Island, its land, air and sea. The Australian Government also has no “control” 
over the indigenous Norfolk Islanders, especially those who are descendants of the 
Pitcairn Settlers living on Norfolk Island. 

For some evidence of what is stated above we refer you all to the attachments. 

The Chamber Committee also recommends you read freedom of information 
statements from the Governor-General’s office, Attorney-General’s office, Australia 
Post, Fair Works Commission and many from the Department of Infrastructure, 
Transport, Regional Development, Communication and the Arts as well as other 
departments of the Australian Government, where you will see that the 
Commonwealth of Australia has no authority, even in an administrative role over 
Norfolk Island and Norfolk Islanders since 1901. 

If the Australian Government insists on including indigenous Norfolk Islanders (those 
living on Norfolk Island) in the Australian Government elections, then the Australian 

Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce,   Norfolk Island                     Email:   norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com


--- Page 47 ---

Government is in breach of its own Commonwealth of Australia Constitution and 
breaking its own laws and acting unlawfully and illegally in international law. 

The Chamber Committee brings to your attention the following which was placed in 
public domain in December 2024. 

Open letter to media editors 
At Last: A brief explanation of the Truth - Norfolk Island 
Just on 3 years we commenced the journey with the aim of finding out the 
truth of what Norfolk Island’s true legal and lawful status is since our ancestors 
arrived on Norfolk Island 8 June 1856. Along the way we have had some help 
from a few people, and we thank you all for that. We have ignored the 
negative comments, the threats and pushed through to eventually put 
together what we have found - the TRUTH. 

Her Majesty Queen Victoria’s Imperial Wastelands Act 1855 

· This Act was for the purpose of settling ‘unsettled’ Imperial Crown land 

· It was under this Act that allowed Queen Victoria’s Agreement through the 
1856 Order in Council to separate Norfolk Island into a distinct and separate 
Colony within the British Empire for the Pitcairn Settlers and their 
descendants. 

In May 1856 Queen Victoria commenced arrangements for a Royal Seal and 
the Order 24 June 1856, was also for “Trade and Foreign Affairs” to be “made 
use of within the said Government”. Then December 1856 the Royal Warrant 
was signed by Queen Victoria. All those were used to ‘settle’ the Crown waste 
land of Norfolk Island in 1856. The Governor of New South Wales as Governor 
of Norfolk Island “for the time being” disappears completely. 

The relocation of the Pitcairn Islanders to Norfolk Island was a result of a direct 
Agreement between Queen Victoria and the people of Pitcairn’s Island. This 
Agreement carried legal, lawful and moral significance, recognising the Pitcairn 
Islander’s autonomy, rights and self-governance under the protection of the 
Imperial Crown.


--- Page 48 ---

There is so much more to this Truth and in the new year it will be explained 
and how it links in a positive way for the United Nations complaint and what 
action needs to commence immediately. · 

Albert always used to say “start from 1855” -- thanks Al. 

No-one can change the Truth - and that Truth now must be adhered to for the 
memory of our ancestors, for the sake of the descendants of the Pitcairn 
Settlers and the future generation and Norfolk Islanders. 

There is more on this to come in 2025. 

In the meantime, we are more than happy to talk to anyone who is willing to 
listen and understand and accept the Truth. 

Norfolk Island’s legal status must be reviewed and restored to reflect the 
protections established under the Imperial 1855 Act. The breaches committed 
- both legal and moral- demand accountability and reaffirmation of the Norfolk 
Islanders rights. 

The people of Norfolk Island (Pitcairn Settlers) were promised self-governance 
and autonomy under the Imperial Crown’s protection. It is time for that 
promise to be honoured. 

May 2025 be the year of lawful restoration - and may God be with all Ucklun. 
Catherine McCoy and Cherri Buffett, 
Descendants of the Pitcairn Settlers. · 28th December 2024 

The Chamber Committee awaits a reply from the Australian Electoral Commission 
before 31st January 2025. 

Sincerely, 
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce Committee 
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce 
_Disclaimer_ 
This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged 
material. Any review, disclosure, dissemination, re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance upon this 
information is prohibited without Chamber Committee approval in writing.  
If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission including any 
attachments


--- Page 49 ---

Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce  

Open Submmission: 

Submission  
to the  
Norfolk Island Governance Committee 

“Proposed Preamble” 

A preamble (introductory statement) to any document should be legally correct and show 

the truth of the history it is referring to. 

The Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce (Chamber) Committee believes an answer must 

be given to an initial question of:- 

Is this proposed preamble to be included with a statute? 

If so, which statute? 

And, the Chamber is of the opinion that the proposed preamble then has a legal status 

meaning and it is vitally important to ensure the truth is told within that proposed preamble.   

Can and will the Norfolk Island Governance Committee and the 

Commonwealth of Australia confirm in writing that all the information 

within the proposed preamble are true and correct records of history? 

If not, then until all that information is confirmed and evidence is provided to Norfolk 

Islanders and, especially to the descendants of the Pitcairn Settlers (many who are 

Chamber members) then that proposed preamble, or any preamble should not and cannot 

be used. 

Can the Australian Government state categorically that they are 

committed to a new preamble that has only the evidence of truth of 

Norfolk Island, and Norfolk Islander’s history since 1850s?    

Page 1 of 6


--- Page 50 ---

Questions have already been asked for the true facts of Norfolk Island’s history from the  

1850s  to be provided to the Norfolk Island people by the Australian Government, but 

neither the Australian Government nor the Norfolk Island Governance Committee have had 

the courtesy to do so.  That is unacceptable and leads to Norfolk Islanders and other 

people believing that the Australian Government is possibly hiding something – perhaps the 

truth.    

It is also a person’s human rights to have and live by and with the truth: 

The United Nations states: 

Human rights are rights inherent to all human beings, regardless of race, sex, nationality, 

ethnicity, language, religion, or any other status. Human rights include the right to life and 

liberty, freedom from slavery and torture, freedom of opinion and expression, the right to 

work and education, and many more.  Everyone is entitled to these rights, without 

discrimination. 

https://www.un.org/en/global-issues/human-

rights#:~:text=Human%20rights%20are%20rights%20inherent,and%20education%2

C%20and%20many%20more. 

Apart from adhering to the Australian Constitution, it is the Australian Government’s moral 

duty to provide the legitimacy of history, especially after what was stated in the 

documentations for the then Minister responsible for Norfolk Island, Senator Ley and in 

which her brief refers to the then Preamble and the history of the descendants of the 

Pitcairn Settlers  

(Refer:  attachments   No. 1, 1A, 1B). 

Australia is a constitutional monarchy.   

For the Commonwealth of Australia (Australian Government) to ignore, and/or change the 

history of Norfolk Island is unlawful and just as important, it is disrespectful and an insult to 

the memory of Her Majesty Queen Victoria, to the Monarchy itself, to the descendants of 

the Pitcairn Settlers and to Norfolk Islanders.   

The following reference to evidence should also be included in this proposed preamble.   

(Refer attachment No. 2).   

Page 2 of 6


--- Page 51 ---

These copied extracts are from public documents obtained through research. 

i. 

19th May 1856 - Establishment of the Norfolk Island Seal to be used by the Norfolk 

Island Government.   

ii. 

8th June 1856 – the Pitcairn Settlers arrived and took possession (ownership) of 

Norfolk Island, and from that day governed themselves with their own Constitution, 

laws and government. 

iii. 

24th June 1856 – An order of Her Majesty Queen Victoria   (refer to typed copy 

attachment No. 2) 

iv. 

24th June 1856 - Her Majesty Queen Victoria’s Instructions.  The handwritten 

document has a Royal Seal stamp at the top left. 

v. 

5th December 1856 - Her Majesty Queen Victoria’s Royal Warrant for Norfolk Island.    

(Refer:  attachment No. 3) 

The Chamber provides the following information for consideration by the Norfolk Island 

Governance Committee and which must assist with bringing about ensuring the truth is 

placed in the proposed preamble:-: 

a)  A typed document entitled Order In Council, dated 24th June 1856  

(Refer:  attachment No. 4) 

• This document does not have Her Majesty Queen Victoria’s Seal. 

• A handwritten document is in #9, Quality Row, Norfolk Island but again 

there is no Royal Seal on the document, it also says “copy”.  What is 

it a Copy of? 

• Where is the handwritten document (as referred to here), and written 

like the Instructions mentioned above (point  no. iv) of the Order in 

Council dated 24th June 1856 with Her Majesty Queen Victoria’s 

approval and Royal Seal? 

b)  In printed papers “Further Papers, Removal of Inhabitants of Pitcairn’s Island to 

Norfolk Island” there is the same typed information as referred to in a) above.    

c)  That document in b) above is linked to a despatch from Hon. H. Labouchere, MP 

(London) to Governor Sir W. Denison (NSW) dated 27th June 1856.  Also included in 

that same despatch is the wording:-  

Page 3 of 6


--- Page 52 ---

“transmit to you Her Majesty’s Instructions, under the Royal Sign Manual 

and Signet, for the guidance of your conduct in administering the affairs of 

Norfolk Island”.   

Those ‘Instructions’ are not included in the printed copies mentioned 

in b) above.  Why not? 

The Chamber states that until all the correct and truthful information regarding Her 

Majesty Queen Victoria’s decisions and instructions are provided to the public (which 

includes Chamber members) then no further action can be taken about a proposed 

preamble.   

The reasons are because the 24th June 1856 Order in Council is referred to in:- 

➢  The Order in Council 15th January 1897 

➢  The Order in Council 30th March 1914 

➢  The Norfolk Island Act No. 15 of 1913 – Commonwealth of Australia, and therefore in 

all other acts following on from the 1913 Act.                            

➢  The Norfolk Island Act 1979  

Turning now to the Commonwealth of Australia (Australian Government) Norfolk Island Act 

No. 15 of 1913 which is mentioned in the proposed preamble, the Chamber makes the 

following comments: 

▪  Firstly, in letters dated 1913 from the British Government (Downing Street) to 

Australian Government it states that Imperial Legislation is necessary  “before 

the island [Norfolk Island] can be annexed to the Commonwealth or the 

administration can be vested in the Commonwealth Government”. 

(Refer: copy of letters -  Attachment no. 2) 

Where is that British legislation? 

▪  Secondly, The Commonwealth Federal Parliament enacted the 16th statute  - Pacific 

Island Labourers Act 1901.  Up until 1970s when the Australian Government ended 

the ‘White Australia Policy’, indigenous Norfolk Islanders were not wanted in 

Australia.   

Page 4 of 6


--- Page 53 ---

▪  The Commonwealth Parliament enacted the Norfolk Island Acceptance Act 1913 

(Commonwealth of Australia) assented to by the then Governor General of Australia 

on 19th December 1913 (Act No. 15 of 1913). 

▪  For the enactment of that 1913 legislation the Commonwealth of Australia 

(Australian Government) relied upon section 122 of the Commonwealth of Australia 

Constitution. 

▪  Section 3 of the 1913 acceptance legislation declares Norfolk Island to be accepted 

by the Commonwealth of Australia as a ‘territory under the authority of the 

Commonwealth by the name of Norfolk Island’.   

▪ 

It is important to note and accept that ‘declaration’ had no legal force in 1913. 

▪  Section 122 Government of Territories of the Australian Constitution: 

o  The Parliament may make laws for the government of any territory 

surrendered by any State in and accepted by the Commonwealth, or of any 

territory placed by the Queen under the authority of and accepted by the 

Commonwealth, or otherwise acquired by the Commonwealth, and may 

allow the representation of such territory in either House of the Parliament to 

the extent and on the terms which it thinks fit.” 

o  The proper process for section 122 is that: 

▪  Norfolk Island to be “placed” offered 

▪  The Commonwealth of Australia to have then “accepted” the offer. 

▪  This is not the process the Commonwealth of Australia did. 

▪  Therefore, the Commonwealth of Australia has overstepped its 

authority in terms of its possession by any constitutional power of 

Norfolk Island through making an acceptance law based on section 

122 of the Australian Federal Constitution. 

▪  That 1913 legislation is invalid in law. 

▪ 

It is also important to accept that the Australian Government 1913 legislation (as 

referred to herein) does not mention any other Australian Government Constitutional 

basis upon which Australia may have relied upon to enact the 1913 legislation.  For 

example:  telecommunications, postal (section 51(v), defence (section 51(vi),  

▪ 

 In fact, section 51 of the Australian Constitution has no mention whatsoever in the 

1913 legislation for Norfolk Island and was not relied upon by the Australian 

Government in 1913 for the purported Australian enactment for Norfolk Island.  

Page 5 of 6


--- Page 54 ---

▪  The Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 - Imperial Order in Council No. 1031 of 1925 

identifies Papua and Norfolk Island still being a British Crown possession. 

▪  The Chamber is certain  His Majesty the King as well as the Imperial Privy Council 

would not have made such a major legal blunder to refer to Norfolk Island as a 

British Possession, (as mentioned above) and also it to be  placed under the 

authority of the Commonwealth of Australia as the Australian government now 

contends ownership, control of Norfolk Island as transferred in 1914. 

▪  The Norfolk Island Act 1979 preamble has the supposedly legal history of Norfolk 

Island, governing under the authority of the Commonwealth of Australia, and noting 

the role of the Pitcairn Settlers for the settlement of Norfolk Island on 8 June 1856.  

▪  But from 2015 to the present day, it is obvious the Commonwealth of Australia has 

become determined to remove from Norfolk Island’s history and also legislative 

records the history of the Pitcairn Settlers / Norfolk Islanders as well as the legal and 

lawful truth that: 

Norfolk Island is a distinct and separate Colony 

as by acts of the British Parliament. 

“An Act to amend so much of an Act of the last Session for the Government of 

New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land as relates to Norfolk Island” 

“An Act to repeal the Acts of Parliament now in force respecting the disposal 

of Waste Lands of the Crown in Her Majesty’s Australian Colonies and to 

make other provisions in lieu thereof” 

It is obvious today, as it was in 1920s when discussions were held between British 

Government officials with the then Prime Minister of Australia that the Commonwealth of 

Australia (Australian Government) did NOT receive any ownership or legal title to Norfolk 

Island at any time from 1914 onwards and the position and policy is that Norfolk Island 

remains a distinct and separate colony as given by Her Majesty Queen Victoria in 1856. 

Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce Committee 

Email:  

17th September 2024 

Page 6 of 6 

s 47F


--- Page 55 ---

Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce  

Open Submmission: 

ADDENDUM to  

Submission to the  

Norfolk Island Governance Committee 

“Proposed Preamble” 

In 1914 for the first time in the Commonwealth of Australia Federal Parliament there was a 

Double Dissolution. 

1914—the deadlock was broken by the Government losing its majority in the House as a 

result of the double dissolution election. The legislation was not reintroduced. 

https://www.aph.gov.au/about_parliament/house_of_representatives/powers_practice_and_

procedure/00 - infosheets/infosheet 18 - double dissolution 

Australian Government documents show that this process commenced in June 1914, 

“At a private interview with the Governor-General on the 2nd June [1914] the Prime 

Minister (Mr Cook) speaking for his Government, made a general statement, and 

submitted three memoranda setting out the reasons why the Cabinet considered the 

double dissolution should be granted.” 

 and then 

 “on 30th July 1914, for the first time in the history of the Commonwealth, the 

Governor-General exercised the power vested in him under section 57 of the 

Constitution and dissolved simultaneously both Houses of the Federal Parliament.” 

Page 1 of 2


--- Page 56 ---

That situation and the following must be considered for not only the 1st 

July 1914 proclamation in association with the Norfolk Island Act 1913 

but also the legal and lawful authority that the Commonwealth of 

Australia claims over Norfolk Island. 

The Australian Associated Chambers of Commerce in February 1913 requested the 

Governor-General to transmit to the Secretary of State (S/S) protesting against the 

Commonwealth Navigation Bill receiving assent. 

The Governor-General was advised by the Commonwealth Attorney-General 

 “That His Excellency was under no duty to forward the message and that for 

constitutional reasons Ministers were opposed to its being forwarded by the 

Governor-General.” 

In a dispatch ‘secret’ July 1913 the case was referred to the S/S. 

The ruling given was 

“every British subject has the right of appeal to H.M., and that while there is nothing 

in Royal Instructions which requires a Governor-General to forward message of this 

nature to the Colonial office, Colonial office Regulations Nos 212 and 215 laid down 

that it was the duty of a Governor to transmit to the S/S all petitions to the Throne 

and all messages addressed to S/S for the Colonies or H.M’s Government.” 

Did all the petitions from Norfolk Island residents get sent to Her /His Majesty? 

Norfolk Islanders and descendants of the Pitcairn Settlers are British subjects  

Norfolk Island is a distinct and separate Colony  

Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce Committee 

Email:  

17th September 2024 

Page 2 of 2 

s 47F


--- Page 57 ---

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:

Legal Services Mailbox

Legal Services Mailbox
FW: AEC - Norfolk Island [SEC=OFFICIAL]
Tuesday, 26 March 2024 5:31:29 PM

Dear Ms Buffett
I acknowledge receipt of your email below and advise the AEC has nothing further to add to my
earlier correspondence of 15 February 2024.  We do not intend to engage further on the
constitutional issues you have raised.

Kind regards

Andrew Johnson
Chief Legal Officer
Legal Services Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

> 

From: C B <
Sent: Thursday, March 21, 2024 7:58 AM
To: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>
Cc: Robyn Black <Robyn.Black@aec.gov.au>; 
Gleeson <Kath.Gleeson@aec.gov.au>; Tom Rogers <Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au>;
geoff.pope@aec.gov.au; Michael Lynch <Michael.Lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan
<Thomas.Ryan@aec.gov.au>; 
Subject: Fwd: FW: AEC - Norfolk Island [SEC=OFFICIAL]

 Kath

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click
links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.

Good morning Andrew

Reference your email and attached document.  I provide you with just a snippet of
evidence that Norf'k Ailen (also known as Norfolk Island) is not part of the
Commonwealth of Australia and the Australian Government has no authority to
administer or have control of the aliens land, sea and air, including the EEZ

These quotes below are from Australian Government documents.

So I would suggest the Australian Electoral Commission take a serious look at the illegal
and unlawful actions they are doing in relation to Norf'k Ailen.

Example No. 1    Australian Hansard 1901   New South Wales Government 

Example No. 2

s 47Fs 47Fs 22s 22Section 22


--- Page 58 ---

Commonwealth of Australian Constitution Act   Section 122

Government of territories.

The Parliament may make laws for the government of any territory
surrendered by any State to and accepted by the Commonwealth, or of
any territory placed by the Queen under the authority of and accepted by
the Commonwealth, or otherwise acquired by the Commonwealth, and
may allow the representation of such territory in either House of the
Parliament to the extent and on the terms which it thinks fit.

Example No. 3 

Example No. 4

The lawful exercise of Section 122 of the Australian
Constitutional law making power for territories by the Australian
federal parliament required the following essential elements:

(a) That Norfolk Island had already been "PLACED" under
the authority of the Commonwealth by the Sovereign

(b) Then the Commonwealth of Australia (prior to the
making of any territories law for Norfolk Island)
"ACCEPTED" the placement of Norfolk Island by the Crown

(c)  That the law being made be for the peace order and
good government of a territory seems to be left unstated
by the Constitution and seems largely over the years to
have been left in the hands of the lawmakers and
bureaucracy unless challenged in the courts by a person or
persons with proper legal standing to bring such a
challenge.

This never happened.

Example No. 5

The Australia Act 1986 (Commonwealth) was enacted into law
and signed by Her Majesty 1988.

https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2004A03181

That Australia Act 1986 (Commonwealth) now prevents His
Majesty the King from making any new Order in Council or
seeking the making by the British Imperial Parliament of any
new Imperial law formally transferring outright ownership of
Norfolk Island to the Commonwealth of Australia.

Example No. 6


--- Page 59 ---

Norf'k Ailen is     29.0408° S, 167.9547° E

THE FOLLOWING SHOWS HOW NORF'K AILEN HAS NEVER BEEN PART OF STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND
THEREFORE CANNOT BE PART OF THE  COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA

New South Wales Consolidated Acts

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902 - SECT 4

Application of Act

4 APPLICATION OF ACT

For the purposes of this Act, the boundaries of New South Wales shall comprise all that
portion of Australia lying between the one hundred and twenty-ninth and one hundred
and fifty-fourth degrees of east longitude, reckoning from the meridian of Greenwich
and northward of the fortieth degree of south latitude, including all the islands
adjacent in the Pacific Ocean within the latitude aforesaid, and also including Lord
Howe Island, save and except the territories comprised within the boundaries of South
Australia, Victoria, and Queensland, as at present established.

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902 - SECT 5

General legislative powers

5 GENERAL LEGISLATIVE POWERS

The Legislature shall, subject to the provisions of the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Act, have power to make laws for the peace, welfare, and good
government of New South Wales in all cases whatsoever--
Provided that all Bills for appropriating any part of the public revenue, or for imposing
any new rate, tax or impost, shall originate in the Legislative Assembly.

Example No. 7

Unlawful and Illegal action by the Commonwealth of Australia / Australian Government
and New South Wales Government and now the Queensland Government.

The Local Government Act 1993 NSW DOES NOT include Norf'k Ailen.

There are NO references to Norf'k Ailen in the Act or the Regulations.

The only reference is from a FOI to the Ordinance from the Governor-General where
the Local Government Act emplowered only via the Ordinance.

There are no references to the ordinance in the Local Government Act, as such, the


--- Page 60 ---

Parliament of New South Wales HAS NOT given approval for Norf'k Ailen to be included
within the territorial boundaries of New South Wales.

Section 4 of the Local Government Act binds the Crown in the right of New South Wales
BUT DOES NOT include Norf'k Ailen as in the right of New South Wales.

Norf'k Ailen has never been part of the State of New South Wales since 1856.

Example No. 8
“This request of information concerns Commonwealth of Australian law and the alteration
to the administration of land in Norfolk Island, by transfer instruments.

We request the instrument of transfer from the United Kingdom, the Monarch or any
entity to the Commonwealth of Australia providing a power of interest in lands situated on
Norfolk Island.

We request the power within the Constitution providing administration over the lands of
Norfolk Island beyond the limited power of section 122 to write laws for the Government
of a Territory.

We request the 'original claim of right' the Commonwealth of Australia assumes to have
acquired prior to, or after the Great Seal of Norfolk Island granted by Queen Victoria to the
Pitcairn people upon settlement of Norfolk Island of the grant of the waste lands of the
Crown in right of Norfolk Island established 1856.

Additionally we request the information of the enumerated head of power within the
Australian Constitution that the Commonwealth of Australia relies upon to transfer the
lands of Norfolk Island

GOVERNOR GENERAL'S ANSWER

DECISION

THE OFFICE HAS BEEN UNABLE TO IDENTIFY ANY DOCUMENTS WITHIN THE SCOPE OF YOUR REQUEST.

ACCORDINGLY, I ADVISE THAT I MUST REJECT YOUR REQUEST UNDER SECTION 24A OF THE FOI ACT ON THE
BASIS THAT THE DOCUMENT(S) SOUGHT CANNOT BE FOUND, DO NOT EXIST OR HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED.

Example No. 9

If EXTRA TERRITORIAL POWER did not come until 1942 with the adoption of the
STATUTE OF WESTMINSTER ----- then how was the Norfolk Island Act 1913 created?

--- lies and more lies by the Commonwealth of Australia that Norf'k Ailen belongs to
Australia and they are allowed to "control".

Norf'k Ailen is an independent sovereign Nation as granted by Queen Victoria in 1856.

Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942


--- Page 61 ---

3 Power of Parliament of Dominion to legislate extra-territorially

It is hereby declared and enacted that the Parliament of a Dominion has full power to
make laws having extra-territorial operation.

Section 9 of the Statute of Westminster provides an estoppel for the Commonwealth of
Australia to write local government laws...

9 Saving with respect to States of Australia

(1) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to authorize the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of Australia to make laws on any matter within the authority of the
States of Australia, not being a matter within the authority of the Parliament or
Government of the Commonwealth of Australia.

Section 10 of the Statute of Westminster says ..... the above sections only apply if
adopted, they were adopted so they do apply... the Commonwealth of Australia shot
itself in the foot by this adoption in regard to creating local government laws for Norf'k
Ailen.

10 Certain sections of Act not to apply to Australia, New Zealand or Newfoundland
unless adopted

(1) None of the following sections of this Act, that is to say, sections two, three, four,
five and six, shall extend to a Dominion to which this section applies as part of the law
of that Dominion unless that section is adopted by the Parliament of the Dominion, and
any Act of that Parliament adopting any section of this Act may provide that the
adoption shall have effect either from the commencement of this Act or from such later
date as is specified in the adopting Act.

(3) The Dominions to which this section applies are the Commonwealth of Australia, the
Dominion of New Zealand and Newfoundland.

Example No. 10

The Defence of this island is very important but as it is not part of the
Commonwealth  nothing can be done by the Commonwealth Defence
Department unless the island is annexed.”

Extract letter from NSW Governor to the Governor General  1906   Part 2

Example No. 11
Confidential report for tax committee of cabinet  1971  ---- QUOTE:  The Island is not


--- Page 62 ---

legally part of the Commonwealth and hence is not part of
"Australia" UNQUOTE

Example No. 12

In 1999 the Royal Australian Mint wrote to an Australian stating that  ---- QUOTE  Norfolk
Island itself was not incorporated into the Commonwealth and has never
been ceded or annexed to Australia.  UNQUOTE.

Regards
Cherri Buffett

---------- Forwarded message ---------
From: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>
Date: Thu, 15 Feb 2024 at 18:15
Subject: FW: AEC - Norfolk Island [SEC=OFFICIAL]
To: 
Cc: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>

 <

>

Dear Ms Buffett

Attached please find the AEC’s response to your letter to the Electoral Commissioner.

Kind regards
Andrew

Chief Legal Officer
Australian Electoral Commission

From: C B <
> 
Sent: Friday, January 19, 2024 4:27 PM
To: Robyn Black <Robyn.Black@aec.gov.au>; 
<
<Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au>; geoff.pope@aec.gov.au; Michael Lynch
<Michael.Lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan <Thomas.Ryan@aec.gov.au>; 
<
Cc: senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au;

>; deanna.easton@pmc.gov.au

>; Kath Gleeson <Kath.Gleeson@aec.gov.au>; Tom Rogers

Senator.David.Pocock@aph.gov.au; Pauline.hanson@aph.gov.au;

 mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au; FOI.IPS@gg.gov.au;

s 47Fs 47Fs 47FSection 22s 22s 22s 22s 22


--- Page 63 ---

Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au; 
senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au
Subject: AEC - Norfolk Island

; 

;

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do
not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content
is safe.

Attached is a letter to Mr Tom Rogers Commissioner, Australian Electoral
Commission for his urgent attention, thank you

DISCLAIMER:

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email
and delete all copies.  If this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that
error does not constitute waiver of any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of
information in the email or attachments. 

s 22s 22


--- Page 64 ---

> 

From: C B <
Sent: Thursday, March 21, 2024 7:58 AM
To: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>
Cc: Robyn Black <Robyn.Black@aec.gov.au>; 
<Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au>; geoff.pope@aec.gov.au; Michael Lynch <Michael.Lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan <Thomas.Ryan@aec.gov.au>; 

 Kath Gleeson <Kath.Gleeson@aec.gov.au>; Tom Rogers

Subject: Fwd: FW: AEC - Norfolk Island [SEC=OFFICIAL]

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and
know the content is safe.

Good morning Andrew

Reference your email and attached document.  I provide you with just a snippet of evidence that Norf'k Ailen (also known as Norfolk Island) is
not part of the Commonwealth of Australia and the Australian Government has no authority to administer or have control of the aliens land, sea
and air, including the EEZ

These quotes below are from Australian Government documents.

So I would suggest the Australian Electoral Commission take a serious look at the illegal and unlawful actions they are doing in relation to Norf'k
Ailen.

Example No. 1    Australian Hansard 1901   New South Wales Government 

Example No. 2
Commonwealth of Australian Constitution Act   Section 122

Government of territories.

The Parliament may make laws for the government of any territory surrendered by any State to and accepted by the
Commonwealth, or of any territory placed by the Queen under the authority of and accepted by the Commonwealth, or
otherwise acquired by the Commonwealth, and may allow the representation of such territory in either House of the
Parliament to the extent and on the terms which it thinks fit.

Example No. 3 

Example No. 4

The lawful exercise of Section 122 of the Australian Constitutional law making power for territories by the
Australian federal parliament required the following essential elements:

s 42s 42s 47FSection 22Section 22Section 22


--- Page 65 ---

(a) That Norfolk Island had already been "PLACED" under the authority of the Commonwealth by the
Sovereign

(b) Then the Commonwealth of Australia (prior to the making of any territories law for Norfolk
Island) "ACCEPTED" the placement of Norfolk Island by the Crown

(c)  That the law being made be for the peace order and good government of a territory seems to be
left unstated by the Constitution and seems largely over the years to have been left in the hands of
the lawmakers and bureaucracy unless challenged in the courts by a person or persons with proper
legal standing to bring such a challenge.

This never happened.

Example No. 5

The Australia Act 1986 (Commonwealth) was enacted into law and signed by Her Majesty 1988.

https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2004A03181

That Australia Act 1986 (Commonwealth) now prevents His Majesty the King from making any new Order
in Council or seeking the making by the British Imperial Parliament of any new Imperial law formally
transferring outright ownership of Norfolk Island to the Commonwealth of Australia.

Example No. 6

Norf'k Ailen is     29.0408° S, 167.9547° E

THE FOLLOWING SHOWS HOW NORF'K AILEN HAS NEVER BEEN PART OF STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND THEREFORE CANNOT BE PART OF THE  COMMONWEALTH OF
AUSTRALIA

New South Wales Consolidated Acts

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902 - SECT 4

Application of Act

4 APPLICATION OF ACT

For the purposes of this Act, the boundaries of New South Wales shall comprise all that portion of Australia lying between the one hundred and
twenty-ninth and one hundred and fifty-fourth degrees of east longitude, reckoning from the meridian of Greenwich and northward of the
fortieth degree of south latitude, including all the islands adjacent in the Pacific Ocean within the latitude aforesaid, and also including Lord Howe
Island, save and except the territories comprised within the boundaries of South Australia, Victoria, and Queensland, as at present established.

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902 - SECT 5

General legislative powers

5 GENERAL LEGISLATIVE POWERS

The Legislature shall, subject to the provisions of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, have power to make laws for the peace,
welfare, and good government of New South Wales in all cases whatsoever--
Provided that all Bills for appropriating any part of the public revenue, or for imposing any new rate, tax or impost, shall originate in the
Legislative Assembly.

Example No. 7

Unlawful and Illegal action by the Commonwealth of Australia / Australian Government and New South Wales Government and now the
Queensland Government.

The Local Government Act 1993 NSW DOES NOT include Norf'k Ailen.

There are NO references to Norf'k Ailen in the Act or the Regulations.

The only reference is from a FOI to the Ordinance from the Governor-General where the Local Government Act emplowered only via the
Ordinance.

There are no references to the ordinance in the Local Government Act, as such, the Parliament of New South Wales HAS NOT given approval for
Norf'k Ailen to be included within the territorial boundaries of New South Wales.

Section 4 of the Local Government Act binds the Crown in the right of New South Wales BUT DOES NOT include Norf'k Ailen as in the right of New
South Wales.

Norf'k Ailen has never been part of the State of New South Wales since 1856.

Example No. 8
“This request of information concerns Commonwealth of Australian law and the alteration to the administration of land in Norfolk Island, by transfer
instruments.

We request the instrument of transfer from the United Kingdom, the Monarch or any entity to the Commonwealth of Australia providing a power of
interest in lands situated on Norfolk Island.

We request the power within the Constitution providing administration over the lands of Norfolk Island beyond the limited power of section 122 to
write laws for the Government of a Territory.

We request the 'original claim of right' the Commonwealth of Australia assumes to have acquired prior to, or after the Great Seal of Norfolk Island
granted by Queen Victoria to the Pitcairn people upon settlement of Norfolk Island of the grant of the waste lands of the Crown in right of Norfolk
Island established 1856.

Additionally we request the information of the enumerated head of power within the Australian Constitution that the Commonwealth of Australia
relies upon to transfer the lands of Norfolk Island

GOVERNOR GENERAL'S ANSWER

DECISION

THE OFFICE HAS BEEN UNABLE TO IDENTIFY ANY DOCUMENTS WITHIN THE SCOPE OF YOUR REQUEST.

ACCORDINGLY, I ADVISE THAT I MUST REJECT YOUR REQUEST UNDER SECTION 24A OF THE FOI ACT ON THE BASIS THAT THE DOCUMENT(S) SOUGHT CANNOT BE FOUND, DO NOT
EXIST OR HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED.

Example No. 9

If EXTRA TERRITORIAL POWER did not come until 1942 with the adoption of the STATUTE OF WESTMINSTER ----- then how was the Norfolk Island
Act 1913 created?

--- lies and more lies by the Commonwealth of Australia that Norf'k Ailen belongs to Australia and they are allowed to "control".


--- Page 66 ---

Norf'k Ailen is an independent sovereign Nation as granted by Queen Victoria in 1856.

Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942

3 Power of Parliament of Dominion to legislate extra-territorially

It is hereby declared and enacted that the Parliament of a Dominion has full power to make laws having extra-territorial operation.

Section 9 of the Statute of Westminster provides an estoppel for the Commonwealth of Australia to write local government laws...

9 Saving with respect to States of Australia

(1) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to authorize the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia to make laws on any matter within the
authority of the States of Australia, not being a matter within the authority of the Parliament or Government of the Commonwealth of Australia.

Section 10 of the Statute of Westminster says ..... the above sections only apply if adopted, they were adopted so they do apply... the
Commonwealth of Australia shot itself in the foot by this adoption in regard to creating local government laws for Norf'k Ailen.

10 Certain sections of Act not to apply to Australia, New Zealand or Newfoundland unless adopted

(1) None of the following sections of this Act, that is to say, sections two, three, four, five and six, shall extend to a Dominion to which this section
applies as part of the law of that Dominion unless that section is adopted by the Parliament of the Dominion, and any Act of that Parliament
adopting any section of this Act may provide that the adoption shall have effect either from the commencement of this Act or from such later
date as is specified in the adopting Act.

(3) The Dominions to which this section applies are the Commonwealth of Australia, the Dominion of New Zealand and Newfoundland.

Example No. 10

The Defence of this island is very important but as it is not part of the Commonwealth  nothing can be done by the Commonwealth
Defence Department unless the island is annexed.”

Extract letter from NSW Governor to the Governor General  1906   Part 2

Example No. 11
Confidential report for tax committee of cabinet  1971  ---- QUOTE:  The Island is not legally part of the Commonwealth and
hence is not part of "Australia" UNQUOTE

Example No. 12

In 1999 the Royal Australian Mint wrote to an Australian stating that  ---- QUOTE  Norfolk Island itself was not incorporated into the
Commonwealth and has never been ceded or annexed to Australia.  UNQUOTE.

Regards
Cherri Buffett

---------- Forwarded message ---------
From: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>
Date: Thu, 15 Feb 2024 at 18:15
Subject: FW: AEC - Norfolk Island [SEC=OFFICIAL]
To: 
Cc: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>

 <

>

Dear Ms Buffett

Attached please find the AEC’s response to your letter to the Electoral Commissioner.

Kind regards
Andrew

Chief Legal Officer
Australian Electoral Commission

> 
From: C B <
Sent: Friday, January 19, 2024 4:27 PM
To: Robyn Black <Robyn.Black@aec.gov.au>; 
<Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au>; geoff.pope@aec.gov.au; Michael Lynch <Michael.Lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan <Thomas.Ryan@aec.gov.au>;

 Kath Gleeson <Kath.Gleeson@aec.gov.au>; Tom Rogers

Cc: senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au;
FOI.IPS@gg.gov.au; Senator.David.Pocock@aph.gov.au; Pauline.hanson@aph.gov.au; Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au; 

 mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au;

; deanna.easton@pmc.gov.au

Subject: AEC - Norfolk Island

; senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the
sender and know the content is safe.

Attached is a letter to Mr Tom Rogers Commissioner, Australian Electoral Commission for his urgent attention, thank you

DISCLAIMER:

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email and delete all copies.  If this email or any attachments have
been sent to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver of any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of information in the email or
attachments. 

s 47Fs 47Fs 47FSection 22Section 22Section 22s 22s 22


--- Page 67 ---

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

Legal Services Mailbox

Legal Services Mailbox
FW: AEC - Norfolk Island [SEC=OFFICIAL]
Thursday, 15 February 2024 5:15:15 PM
AEC letter to Ms Cherri Buffett.pdf

Dear Ms Buffett

Attached please find the AEC’s response to your letter to the Electoral Commissioner.

Kind regards
Andrew

Chief Legal Officer
Australian Electoral Commission

From: C B <
> 
Sent: Friday, January 19, 2024 4:27 PM
To: Robyn Black <Robyn.Black@aec.gov.au>; 
Gleeson <Kath.Gleeson@aec.gov.au>; Tom Rogers <Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au>;
geoff.pope@aec.gov.au; Michael Lynch <Michael.Lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan
<Thomas.Ryan@aec.gov.au>; 
deanna.easton@pmc.gov.au
Cc: senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au;

mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au; FOI.IPS@gg.gov.au;

 Kath

Senator.David.Pocock@aph.gov.au; Pauline.hanson@aph.gov.au; Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au;

; 
Subject: AEC - Norfolk Island

; senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click
links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.

Attached is a letter to Mr Tom Rogers Commissioner, Australian Electoral Commission
for his urgent attention, thank you

s 47Fs 47FSection 22Section 22Section 22s 22s 22


--- Page 68 ---

PUCie lm aaa eee
Vv

Ms Cherri Buffet

6y emai Ss

Dear Ms Buffet

2023 federal referendum Rftattelan WA

| refer to your letter dated to the Electoral Commissioner of 19 January 20248fefeile)aw-W as

a Electoral Commissioner has asked me to respond on his
enalt.

The AEC is required to administer the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (‘Electoral Act’) and
the Referendum (Machinery Provisions) Act 1984 (Cth) (‘Referendum Act’). Section 3(3)(a) of
the Electoral Act and section 4(6)(a) of the Referendum Act extend the operation these Acts to
Norfolk Island. Until the Commonwealth Parliament amends these Acts to exclude Norfolk
Island, or a federal court determines Norfolk Island is not subject to Australian law, the AEC is
required to administer and apply these laws. This includes the requirement to enrol and vote in
Commonwealth elections and referendums.

It is compulsory for all eligible Australian citizens to be enrolled and to vote in federal elections
and referendums. The Electoral Act allows for the removal of names from the roll in very limited
circumstances. These reasons do not include being a resident of Norfolk Island. More
information about how a person may be removed from the electoral roll is on the AEC website:

Enrolment — frequently asked questions - Australian Electoral Commission (aec.gov.au)

Section 47F

Section 47F

 

Further information about compulsory voting can be found on the AEC website: Electoral

Backgrounder: Compulsory voting - Australian Electoral Commission (aec.gov.au)

WWwwW.aec.gov.au


--- Page 69 ---

Cc) Pee ae eC)

| am unable to comment on the Norf’k Ailen Government Chief Magistrate and Governor of Norfk
Ailen, other than to note that those bodies have no authority to rule on the conduct of a federal
election or referendum held under the Electoral Act or the Referendum Act.

| trust that the above information is of assistance.

Section 47F

 

Andrew Johnson
Chief Legal Officer

30 January 2024

erra ACT 2 23 2 WWwwW.aec.gov.au


--- Page 70 ---

To:

 

Cc:
Subject: Re: AEC - Norfolk Island
Date: Friday, 2 February 2024 6:59:42 AM

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do
not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content
is safe.

Mr Johnson,

Reference my email communication below. Please reply to my latest email
immediately, thank you.

Kind regards
Cherri Buffett

On Tue, 30 Jan 2024 at 17:56,C B Pi - wrote:

Dear Mr Johnson,

Thank you for your response (copy attached). Reference your paragraph:-

The AEC is required to administer the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(‘Electoral Act’) and the Referendum (Machinery Provisions) Act 1984 (Cth)
(‘Referendum Act’). Section 3(3)(a) of the Electoral Act and section 4(6)(a) of
the Referendum Act extend the operation these Acts to Norfolk Island. Until the
Commonwealth Parliament amends these Acts to exclude Norfolk Island, or a
federal court determines Norfolk Island is not subject to Australian law, the AEC
is required to administer and apply these laws. This includes the requirement to
enrol and vote in Commonwealth elections and referendums.

| would seriously suggest you do your research and come back to me before ‘st
February 2024.

Norfolk Island IS NOT part of the Commonwealth of Australia.

Please note a copy of all my communication has gone to the Governor-General's
office and the Attorney-General's office and the Prime Minister's office plus other
politicians of the Australian Government.


--- Page 71 ---

In regard to your paragraph

I am unable to comment on the Norf’k Ailen Government Chief Magistrate and
Governor of Norf’k Ailen, other than to note that those bodies have no authority
to rule on the conduct of a federal election or referendum held under the
Electoral Act or the Referendum Act.

| would recommend you link into _www.government.nf and also do more
research on the fact that the Commonwealth of Australia (Australian
Government) has breached its own constitution for Norfolk Island.

 

| await your response, thank you.

Kind regards

Cherri Buffett

On Tue, 30 Jan 2024 at 11:19,CB is. wrote:

Mr Rogers,

In my attached letter you to I asked that this matter be finalised by 26
January 2024. You have not even had the courtesy of a reply.

If you and the Australian Government do not provide the written
documentation as requested by myself then I will speak with the Chief
Magistrate / Governor of the Norf'k Ailen Government (the legal entity of
Norf'k Ailen) to request assistance of taking action against the Australian


--- Page 72 ---

Electoral Commission and the Australian Government.

Its time the Australian Government righted the wrong they have and are still
doing.  Therefore please provide the information requested by close of
business today.

Kind regards

Cherri Buffett

On Fri, 19 Jan 2024 at 17:26, C B <

> wrote:

Attached is a letter to Mr Tom Rogers Commissioner, Australian Electoral
Commission for his urgent attention, thank you

s 47F


--- Page 73 ---

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

Legal Services Mailbox

Legal Services Mailbox
FW: AEC - Norfolk Island [SEC=OFFICIAL]
Tuesday, 30 January 2024 4:42:46 PM
image002.png
AEC response to Ms Buffet.pdf

Dear Ms Buffet

Please find attached the AEC’s response to your letter to the Electoral Commissioner.

Kind regards

Andrew Johnson
Chief Legal Officer
Legal Services Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

> 

From: C B <
Sent: Tuesday, January 30, 2024 10:20 AM
To: Robyn Black <Robyn.Black@aec.gov.au>; 
Gleeson <Kath.Gleeson@aec.gov.au>; Tom Rogers <Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au>;
geoff.pope@aec.gov.au; Michael Lynch <Michael.Lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan
<Thomas.Ryan@aec.gov.au>; 
deanna.easton@pmc.gov.au
Cc: senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au;

mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au; FOI.IPS@gg.gov.au;

 Kath

Senator.David.Pocock@aph.gov.au; Pauline.hanson@aph.gov.au; Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au;

; 

 senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au

Subject: Re: AEC - Norfolk Island

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click
links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.

Mr Rogers,

In my attached letter you to I asked that this matter be finalised by 26 January 2024. 
You have not even had the courtesy of a reply.  

If you and the Australian Government do not provide the written documentation as
requested by myself then I will speak with the Chief Magistrate / Governor of the Norf'k
Ailen Government (the legal entity of Norf'k Ailen) to request assistance of taking action
against the Australian Electoral Commission and the Australian Government.

Its time the Australian Government righted the wrong they have and are still doing. 
Therefore please provide the information requested by close of business today.

Kind regards

s 47Fs 47FSection 22Section 22Section 22Section 22s 22


--- Page 74 ---

Cherri Buffett

On Fri, 19 Jan 2024 at 17:26, C B <

> wrote:

Attached is a letter to Mr Tom Rogers Commissioner, Australian Electoral Commission
for his urgent attention, thank you

s 47F


--- Page 75 ---

s 42


--- Page 76 ---

From: Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce, Inc. <norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com>

Sent: Tuesday, 28 January 2025 9:11 PM

To: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>; Jeff Pope <jeff.pope@aec.gov.au>; aaa
>

Cc: a.albanese.mp@aph.gov.au; Aaron.Violi. MP@aph.gov.au; Adam.Bandt.MP@aph.gov.au;
Alicia.Payne.MP@aph.gov.au; Alison.Byrnes.MP@aph.gov.au;
Allegra.Spender.MP@aph.gov.au; amanda.rishworth.mp@aph.gov.au; Andrew Leigh
<andrew.leigh.mp@aph.gov.au>; Andrew Wilkie <andrew.wilkie.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Andrew.Charlton.MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew.Gee.MP@aph.gov.au;
Andrew.Giles. MP @aph.gov.au; Andrew.Hastie. MP@aph.gov.au;


--- Page 77 ---

Andrew.Wallace.MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew.Willcox.MP@aph.gov.au;
Angie.Bell.MP@aph.gov.au; Angus.Taylor.MP@aph.gov.au; Anne.Aly.MP@aph.gov.au;
Anne.Stanley.MP@aph.gov.au; Anne.Webster.MP@aph.gov.au;
Barnaby.Joyce.MP@aph.gov.au; Bert.Vanmanen.MP@aph.gov.au;
bill.shorten.mp@aph.gov.au; Bob.Katter.MP@aph.gov.au; Brendan.OConnor.MP@aph.gov.au;
Brian.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au; Bridget.Archer.MP@aph.gov.au;
carina.garland.MP@aph.gov.au; cassandra.fernando.MP@aph.gov.au;
catherine.king.mp@aph.gov.au; Chris.Bowen.MP@aph.gov.au; Clare O'Neil
<Clare.ONeil.MP@aph.gov.au>; Colin.Boyce.MP@aph.gov.au; Dai.Le.MP@aph.gov.au;
Dan.Repacholi.MP@aph.gov.au; Dan.Tehan.MP@aph.gov.au; Daniel.Mulino.MP@aph.gov.au;
Darren.Chester.MP@aph.gov.au; David.Coleman.MP@aph.gov.au;
David.Gillespie.MP@aph.gov.au; david.littleproud.mp@aph.gov.au; Elizabeth.Watson-
Brown.MP@aph.gov.au; Emma.McBride.MP@aph.gov.au; Fiona.Phillips.MP@aph.gov.au;
Gavin.Pearce.MP@aph.gov.au; Ged.Kearney.MP@aph.gov.au; Gordon.Reid.MP@aph.gov.au;
Graham.Perrett.MP@aph.gov.au; Hamilton, Garth (MP) <garth.hamilton.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Helen.Haines.MP@aph.gov.au; Henry.Pike.MP@aph.gov.au; Ian Goodenough MP
<Ian.Goodenough.MP@aph.gov.au>; James.Stevens.MP@aph.gov.au;
Jason.Clare.MP@aph.gov.au; Jason.Wood.MP@aph.gov.au; Jenny.Ware.MP@aph.gov.au;
jerome.laxale.MP@aph.gov.au; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au; Joanne.Ryan.MP@aph.gov.au;
Josh.Burns.MP@aph.gov.au; Josh.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au; Julian.Hill.MP@aph.gov.au;
Julie.Collins.MP@aph.gov.au; Justine.Elliot.MP@aph.gov.au; Karen.Andrews.MP@aph.gov.au;
Kate.Chaney.MP@aph.gov.au; Kate.Thwaites.MP@aph.gov.au; Keith.Pitt.MP@aph.gov.au;
Keith.Wolahan.MP@aph.gov.au; Kevin Hogan <Kevin.Hogan.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Kristy.McBain.MP@aph.gov.au; Kylea.Tink.MP@aph.gov.au; Libby.Coker.MP@aph.gov.au;
Linda.Burney.MP@aph.gov.au; Lisa.Chesters.MP@aph.gov.au; Llew.O'Brien.MP@aph.gov.au;
Louise.Miller-Frost.MP@aph.gov.au; Luke.Gosling.MP@aph.gov.au;
Luke.Howarth.MP@aph.gov.au; Madeleine.King.MP@aph.gov.au; Maria Vamvakinou
<Maria.Vamvakinou.MP@aph.gov.au>; Marion.Scrymgour.MP@aph.gov.au; Mark Dreyfus
<mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au>; Mark.Butler.MP@aph.gov.au;
Mark.Coulton.MP@aph.gov.au; mary.doyle.mp@aph.gov.au; Matt.Burnell.MP@aph.gov.au;
Matt.Keogh.MP@aph.gov.au; Matt.Thistlethwaite.MP@aph.gov.au; Max.Chandler-
Mather.MP@aph.gov.au; Melissa.McIntosh.MP@aph.gov.au; Melissa.Price.MP@aph.gov.au;
Meryl.Swanson.MP@aph.gov.au; Michael McCormack MP
<michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au>; Michael.Sukkar.MP@aph.gov.au; Michelle Landry
<Michelle.Landry.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle.Ananda-Rajah.MP@aph.gov.au;
Michelle.Rowland.MP@aph.gov.au; Mike.Freelander.MP@aph.gov.au;
Milton.Dick.MP@aph.gov.au; Nola.Marino.MP@aph.gov.au; Pat.Conaghan.MP@aph.gov.au;
Pat.Conroy.MP@aph.gov.au; Patrick.Gorman.MP@aph.gov.au; Peta.Murphy.MP@aph.gov.au;
Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au; Peter.Khalil.MP@aph.gov.au;
Phillip.Thompson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rebekha.Sharkie.MP@aph.gov.au; RichardMarlesMP
<Richard.Marles.MP@aph.gov.au>; Rick.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rob Mitchell
<Rob.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ross.Vasta.MP@aph.gov.au;
Rowan.Ramsey.MP@aph.gov.au; Russell.Broadbent.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sally.Sitou.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Birrell.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Lim.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sam.Rae.MP@aph.gov.au; Scott Morrison <scott.morrison.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Scott.Buchholz.MP@aph.gov.au; Sharon.Claydon.MP@aph.gov.au; Shayne Neumann


--- Page 78 ---

<shayne.neumann.mp@aph.gov.au>; Smith, David (MP) <david.smith.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Sophie.Scamps.MP@aph.gov.au; Stephen Jones MP <Stephen.Jones.MP@aph.gov.au>;
stephen.bates.MP@aph.gov.au; Steve.Georganas.MP@aph.gov.au;
Susan.Templeman.MP@aph.gov.au; sussan.ley.mp@aph.gov.au;
Tania.Lawrence.MP@aph.gov.au; tanya.plibersek.mp@aph.gov.au;
ted.obrien.mp@aph.gov.au; Terry.Young.MP@aph.gov.au; Tim.Watts.MP@aph.gov.au;
Tony.Burke.MP@aph.gov.au; Tony.Pasin.MP@aph.gov.au; Tony.Zappia.MP@aph.gov.au;
Tracey.Roberts.MP@aph.gov.au; Warren.Entsch.MP@aph.gov.au;
Zali.Steggall.MP@aph.gov.au; Zaneta.Mascarenhas.MP@aph.gov.au;
Zoe.Daniel.MP@aph.gov.au; zoe.mckenzie.MP@aph.gov.au; Gallagher, Katy (Senator)
<senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au>; Helen Polley <senator.polley@aph.gov.au>; Marise
Payne <senator.payne@aph.gov.au>; McDonald, Susan (Senator)
<senator.mcdonald@aph.gov.au>; Richard Colbeck <senator.colbeck@aph.gov.au>;
senator.allman.payne@aph.gov.au; senator.anning@aph.gov.au; senator.askew@aph.gov.au;
senator.ayres@aph.gov.au; senator.babet@aph.gov.au; senator.barbara.pocock@aph.gov.au;
senator.bilyk@aph.gov.au; senator.bragg@aph.gov.au; senator.burston@aph.gov.au;
senator.bushby@aph.gov.au; senator.cadell@aph.gov.au; senator.canavan@aph.gov.au;
senator.cash@aph.gov.au; senator.ciccone@aph.gov.au; senator.cox@aph.gov.au;
senator.farrell@aph.gov.au; senator.faruqi@aph.gov.au; senator.fifield@aph.gov.au;
senator.gallacher@aph.gov.au; senator.georgiou@aph.gov.au; senator.gichuhi@aph.gov.au;
senator.green@aph.gov.au; senator.griff@aph.gov.au; senator.grogan@aph.gov.au;
senator.haines@aph.gov.au; senator.hanson-young@aph.gov.au; senator.hanson@aph.gov.au;
senator.henderson@aph.gov.au; Senator.Hinch@aph.gov.au; senator.hughes@aph.gov.au;
senator.hume@aph.gov.au; senator.lambie@aph.gov.au; senator.leyonjelm@aph.gov.au;
senator.lines@aph.gov.au; senator.marielle.smith@aph.gov.au;
senator.mcallister@aph.gov.au; senator.mccarthy@aph.gov.au; senator.mcgrath@aph.gov.au;
senator.mckenzie@aph.gov.au; senator.mclachlan@aph.gov.au;
senator.nampijinpaprice@aph.gov.au; senator.nash@aph.gov.au; senator.oneill@aph.gov.au;
senator.osullivan@aph.gov.au; senator.paterson@aph.gov.au; senator.patrick@aph.gov.au;
senator.payman@aph.gov.au; senator.pratt@aph.gov.au; senator.rennick@aph.gov.au;
senator.reynolds@aph.gov.au; senator.rhiannon@aph.gov.au; senator.rice@aph.gov.au;
senator.roberts@aph.gov.au; senator.ruston@aph.gov.au; senator.ryan@aph.gov.au;
senator.scarr@aph.gov.au; senator.seselja@aph.gov.au; senator.sheldon@aph.gov.au;
senator.sterle@aph.gov.au; senator.stewart@aph.gov.au; senator.thorpe@aph.gov.au;
senator.tink@aph.gov.au; senator.urquhart@aph.gov.au; senator.van@aph.gov.au;
senator.waers@aph.gov.au; senator.walsh@aph.gov.au; senator.waters@aph.gov.au;
senator.watt@aph.gov.au; senator.whish-wilson@aph.gov.au; senator.wong@aph.gov.au;
SenatorJohnWilliams <senator.williams@aph.gov.au>; Shoebridge, David (Senator Office)
<senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au>
Subject: Re: 2025 Australian Federal elections [SEC=OFFICIAL]

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government.
Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the
content is safe.

Dear Australian Electoral Commission,


--- Page 79 ---

Attached is a second letter for your immediate attention and action.

Kind regards
Chamber Committee
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

L?

Disclaimer

This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged
material. Any review, disclosure, dissemination, re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance upon
this information is prohibited without Chamber Committee approval in writing.

If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission including any
attachments

On Mon, 20 Jan 2025 at 18:03, Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au> wrote:

Dear Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

Attached please find the AEC’s response to your letter to the Acting Electoral
Commissioner.

Kind regards

Andrew Johnson

Chief Legal Officer

Legal Services Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

From: Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce, Inc. <norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com>
Sent: Wednesday, 15 January 2025 8:27 PM

To: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>; Jeff Pope <jeff.pope@aec.gov.au>; aaa

Cc: a.albanese.mp@aph.gov.au; Aaron.Violi. MP@aph.gov.au; Adam.Bandt.MP@aph.gov.au;

 

 

Alicia.Payne.MP@aph.gov.au; Alison.Byrnes.MP@aph.gov.au;
Allegra.Spender.MP@aph.gov.au; amanda.rishworth.mp@aph.gov.au; Andrew Leigh
<andrew. leigh. mp@aph.gov.au>; Andrew Wilkie <andrew.wilkie.mp@aph.gov.au>;

Andrew.Charlton.MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew.Gee.MP@aph.gov.au;
Andrew.Giles.MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew.Hastie. MP@aph.gov.au;

Andrew. Wallace. MP @aph.gov.au; Andrew.Willcox.MP@aph.gov.au;
Angie.Bell. MP @aph.gov.au; Angus. Taylor. MP@aph.gov.au; Anne.Aly.MP@aph.gov.au;
Anne.Stanley. MP @aph.gov.au; Anne.Webster.MP@aph.gov.au;
Barnaby.Joyce.MP@aph.gov.au; Bert. Vanmanen.MP@aph.gov.au;


--- Page 80 ---

bill.shorten.mp@aph.gov.au; Bob.Katter.MP@aph.gov.au;
Brendan.OConnor.MP@aph.gov.au; Brian.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au;
Bridget.Archer.MP@aph.gov.au; carina.garland.MP@aph.gov.au;
cassandra.fernando.MP@aph.gov.au; catherine.king.mp@aph.gov.au;
Chris.Bowen.MP@aph.gov.au; Clare O'Neil <Clare.ONeil.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Colin.Boyce.MP@aph.gov.au; Dai.Le.MP@aph.gov.au; Dan.Repacholi.MP@aph.gov.au;
Dan.Tehan.MP@aph.gov.au; Daniel.Mulino.MP@aph.gov.au;
Darren.Chester.MP@aph.gov.au; David.Coleman.MP@aph.gov.au;
David.Gillespie.MP@aph.gov.au; david.littleproud.mp@aph.gov.au; Elizabeth.Watson-
Brown.MP@aph.gov.au; Emma.McBride.MP@aph.gov.au; Fiona.Phillips.MP@aph.gov.au;
Gavin.Pearce.MP@aph.gov.au; Ged.Kearney.MP@aph.gov.au; Gordon.Reid.MP@aph.gov.au;
Graham.Perrett.MP@aph.gov.au; Hamilton, Garth (MP) <garth.hamilton.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Helen.Haines.MP@aph.gov.au; Henry.Pike.MP@aph.gov.au; Ian Goodenough MP
<Ian.Goodenough.MP@aph.gov.au>; James.Stevens.MP@aph.gov.au;
Jason.Clare.MP@aph.gov.au; Jason.Wood.MP@aph.gov.au; Jenny.Ware.MP@aph.gov.au;
jerome.laxale.MP@aph.gov.au; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au;
Joanne.Ryan.MP@aph.gov.au; Josh.Burns.MP@aph.gov.au; Josh.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au;
Julian.Hill.MP@aph.gov.au; Julie.Collins.MP@aph.gov.au; Justine.Elliot.MP@aph.gov.au;
Karen.Andrews.MP@aph.gov.au; Kate.Chaney.MP@aph.gov.au;
Kate.Thwaites.MP@aph.gov.au; Keith.Pitt.MP@aph.gov.au; Keith.Wolahan.MP@aph.gov.au;
Kevin Hogan <Kevin.Hogan.MP@aph.gov.au>; Kristy.McBain.MP@aph.gov.au;
Kylea.Tink.MP@aph.gov.au; Libby.Coker.MP@aph.gov.au; Linda.Burney.MP@aph.gov.au;
Lisa.Chesters.MP@aph.gov.au; Llew.O'Brien.MP@aph.gov.au; Louise.Miller-
Frost.MP@aph.gov.au; Luke.Gosling.MP@aph.gov.au; Luke.Howarth.MP@aph.gov.au;
Madeleine.King.MP@aph.gov.au; Maria Vamvakinou <Maria.Vamvakinou.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Marion.Scrymgour.MP@aph.gov.au; Mark Dreyfus <mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Mark.Butler.MP@aph.gov.au; Mark.Coulton.MP@aph.gov.au; mary.doyle.mp@aph.gov.au;
Matt.Burnell.MP@aph.gov.au; Matt.Keogh.MP@aph.gov.au;
Matt.Thistlethwaite.MP@aph.gov.au; Max.Chandler-Mather.MP@aph.gov.au;
Melissa.McIntosh.MP@aph.gov.au; Melissa.Price.MP@aph.gov.au;
Meryl.Swanson.MP@aph.gov.au; Michael McCormack MP
<michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au>; Michael.Sukkar.MP@aph.gov.au; Michelle Landry
<Michelle.Landry.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle.Ananda-Rajah.MP@aph.gov.au;
Michelle.Rowland.MP@aph.gov.au; Mike.Freelander.MP@aph.gov.au;
Milton.Dick.MP@aph.gov.au; Nola.Marino.MP@aph.gov.au; Pat.Conaghan.MP@aph.gov.au;
Pat.Conroy.MP@aph.gov.au; Patrick.Gorman.MP@aph.gov.au;
Peta.Murphy.MP@aph.gov.au; Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au; Peter.Khalil.MP@aph.gov.au;
Phillip.Thompson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rebekha.Sharkie.MP@aph.gov.au; RichardMarlesMP
<Richard.Marles.MP@aph.gov.au>; Rick.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rob Mitchell
<Rob.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ross.Vasta.MP@aph.gov.au;
Rowan.Ramsey.MP@aph.gov.au; Russell.Broadbent.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sally.Sitou.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Birrell.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Lim.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sam.Rae.MP@aph.gov.au; Scott Morrison <scott.morrison.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Scott.Buchholz.MP@aph.gov.au; Sharon.Claydon.MP@aph.gov.au; Shayne Neumann
<shayne.neumann.mp@aph.gov.au>; Smith, David (MP) <david.smith.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Sophie.Scamps.MP@aph.gov.au; Stephen Jones MP <Stephen.Jones.MP@aph.gov.au>;


--- Page 81 ---

stephen.bates.MP@aph.gov.au; Steve.Georganas.MP@aph.gov.au;
Susan.Templeman.MP@aph.gov.au; sussan.ley.mp@aph.gov.au;
Tania.Lawrence.MP@aph.gov.au; tanya.plibersek.mp@aph.gov.au;
ted.obrien.mp@aph.gov.au; Terry.Young.MP@aph.gov.au; Tim.Watts.MP@aph.gov.au;
Tony.Burke.MP@aph.gov.au; Tony.Pasin.MP@aph.gov.au; Tony.Zappia.MP@aph.gov.au;
Tracey.Roberts.MP@aph.gov.au; Warren.Entsch.MP@aph.gov.au;
Zali.Steggall.MP@aph.gov.au; Zaneta.Mascarenhas.MP@aph.gov.au;
Zoe.Daniel.MP@aph.gov.au; zoe.mckenzie.MP@aph.gov.au; Gallagher, Katy (Senator)
<senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au>; Helen Polley <senator.polley@aph.gov.au>; Marise
Payne <senator.payne@aph.gov.au>; McDonald, Susan (Senator)
<senator.mcdonald@aph.gov.au>; Richard Colbeck <senator.colbeck@aph.gov.au>;
senator.abetz@aph.gov.au; senator.allman.payne@aph.gov.au; senator.anning@aph.gov.au;
senator.antic@aph.gov.au; senator.askew@aph.gov.au; senator.ayres@aph.gov.au;
senator.babet@aph.gov.au; senator.barbara.pocock@aph.gov.au;
senator.bilyk@aph.gov.au; senator.bragg@aph.gov.au; senator.burston@aph.gov.au;
senator.bushby@aph.gov.au; senator.cadell@aph.gov.au; senator.canavan@aph.gov.au;
senator.cash@aph.gov.au; senator.ciccone@aph.gov.au; senator.cox@aph.gov.au;
senator.farrell@aph.gov.au; senator.faruqi@aph.gov.au; senator.fifield@aph.gov.au;
senator.gallacher@aph.gov.au; senator.georgiou@aph.gov.au; senator.gichuhi@aph.gov.au;
senator.green@aph.gov.au; senator.griff@aph.gov.au; senator.grogan@aph.gov.au;
senator.haines@aph.gov.au; senator.hanson-young@aph.gov.au;
senator.hanson@aph.gov.au; senator.henderson@aph.gov.au; Senator.Hinch@aph.gov.au;
senator.hughes@aph.gov.au; senator.hume@aph.gov.au; senator.lambie@aph.gov.au;
senator.leyonjelm@aph.gov.au; senator.lines@aph.gov.au;
senator.marielle.smith@aph.gov.au; senator.mcallister@aph.gov.au;
senator.mccarthy@aph.gov.au; senator.mcgrath@aph.gov.au;
senator.mckenzie@aph.gov.au; senator.mclachlan@aph.gov.au;
senator.nampijinpaprice@aph.gov.au; senator.nash@aph.gov.au;
senator.oneill@aph.gov.au; senator.osullivan@aph.gov.au; senator.paterson@aph.gov.au;
senator.patrick@aph.gov.au; senator.payman@aph.gov.au; senator.pratt@aph.gov.au;
senator.rennick@aph.gov.au; senator.reynolds@aph.gov.au; senator.rhiannon@aph.gov.au;
senator.rice@aph.gov.au; senator.roberts@aph.gov.au; senator.ruston@aph.gov.au;
senator.ryan@aph.gov.au; senator.scarr@aph.gov.au; senator.seselja@aph.gov.au;
senator.sheldon@aph.gov.au; senator.sterle@aph.gov.au; senator.stewart@aph.gov.au;
senator.thorpe@aph.gov.au; senator.tink@aph.gov.au; senator.urquhart@aph.gov.au;
senator.van@aph.gov.au; senator.waers@aph.gov.au; senator.walsh@aph.gov.au;
senator.waters@aph.gov.au; senator.watt@aph.gov.au; senator.whish-wilson@aph.gov.au;
senator.wong@aph.gov.au; SenatorJohnWilliams <senator.williams@aph.gov.au>;
Shoebridge, David (Senator Office) <senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au>; 

 <

>; SMITH David SMITH

<senator.david.smith@aph.gov.au>; Steven Kennedy
<steven.kennedy@infrastructure.gov.au>; Canberra Office <Canberra@aec.gov.au>;

; nswecmedia@elections.nsw.gov.au; 

 Kath Gleeson <kath.gleeson@aec.gov.au>;

Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au; Michael Lynch <michael.lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan
<thomas.ryan@aec.gov.au>; 

Section 22Section 22s 22s 22s 22


--- Page 82 ---

deanna.easton@pmc.gov.au; glyn.davis@pmc.gov.au; 

 andrew.walter@pmc.gov.au; paul.hupalo@pmc.gov.au;
au; Attorney@ag.gov.au

Subject: 2025 Australian Federal elections - for urgent attention - Reply Requested

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government.
Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know
the content is safe.

Dear Australian Electoral Commission,

Attached is a letter for your immediate attention and action.
Please note a copy of this email has also gone to the Governor-General

Kind regards
Chamber Committee
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

Disclaimer

This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged material. Any review,

disclosure, dissemination, re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance upon this information is prohibited without

Chamber Committee approval in writing. 

If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission including any attachments

DISCLAIMER:

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email
and delete all copies.  If this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that
error does not constitute waiver of any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of
information in the email or attachments. 

Section 22s 22s 22


--- Page 83 ---

s 42


--- Page 84 ---

From: Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce, Inc. <norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com>

Sent: Tuesday, 28 January 2025 9:11 PM

To: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>; Jeff Pope <jeff.pope@aec.gov.au>;
es

Cc: a.albanese.mp@aph.gov.au; Aaron.Violi. MP@aph.gov.au; Adam.Bandt.MP@aph.gov.au;
Alicia.Payne.MP@aph.gov.au; Alison.Byrnes. MP @aph.gov.au;
Allegra.Spender.MP@aph.gov.au; amanda.rishworth.mp@aph.gov.au; Andrew Leigh
<andrew.leigh.mp@aph.gov.au>; Andrew Wilkie <andrew.wilkie.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Andrew.Charlton.MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew.Gee.MP@aph.gov.au;

Andrew.Giles. MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew. Hastie. MP @aph.gov.au;

Andrew. Wallace. MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew. Willcox.MP@aph.gov.au;

Angie.Bell. MP@aph.gov.au; Angus. Taylor. MP@aph.gov.au; Anne.Aly.MP@aph.gov.au;
Anne.Stanley.MP@aph.gov.au; Anne.Webster.MP@aph.gov.au;
Barnaby. Joyce. MP @aph.gov.au; Bert. Vanmanen.MP@aph.gov.au;
bill.shorten.mp@aph.gov.au; Bob.Katter. MP@aph.gov.au; Brendan.OConnor.MP@aph.gov.au;
Brian.Mitchell. MP @aph.gov.au; Bridget.Archer. MP @aph.gov.au;
carina.garland.MP@aph.gov.au; cassandra.fernando.MP@aph.gov.au;

catherine.king. mp@aph.gov.au; Chris.Bowen.MP@aph.gov.au; Clare O'Neil
<Clare.ONeil.MP@aph.gov.au>; Colin.Boyce.MP@aph.gov.au; Dai.Le. MP@aph.gov.au;
Dan.Repacholi. MP@aph.gov.au; Dan. Tehan.MP@aph.gov.au; Daniel. Mulino. MP@aph.gov.au;
Darren.Chester.MP@aph.gov.au; David.Coleman.MP@aph.gov.au;


--- Page 85 ---

David.Gillespie.MP@aph.gov.au; david.littleproud.mp@aph.gov.au; Elizabeth.Watson-
Brown.MP@aph.gov.au; Emma.McBride.MP@aph.gov.au; Fiona.Phillips.MP@aph.gov.au;
Gavin.Pearce.MP@aph.gov.au; Ged.Kearney.MP@aph.gov.au; Gordon.Reid.MP@aph.gov.au;
Graham.Perrett.MP@aph.gov.au; Hamilton, Garth (MP) <garth.hamilton.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Helen.Haines.MP@aph.gov.au; Henry.Pike.MP@aph.gov.au; Ian Goodenough MP
<Ian.Goodenough.MP@aph.gov.au>; James.Stevens.MP@aph.gov.au;
Jason.Clare.MP@aph.gov.au; Jason.Wood.MP@aph.gov.au; Jenny.Ware.MP@aph.gov.au;
jerome.laxale.MP@aph.gov.au; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au; Joanne.Ryan.MP@aph.gov.au;
Josh.Burns.MP@aph.gov.au; Josh.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au; Julian.Hill.MP@aph.gov.au;
Julie.Collins.MP@aph.gov.au; Justine.Elliot.MP@aph.gov.au; Karen.Andrews.MP@aph.gov.au;
Kate.Chaney.MP@aph.gov.au; Kate.Thwaites.MP@aph.gov.au; Keith.Pitt.MP@aph.gov.au;
Keith.Wolahan.MP@aph.gov.au; Kevin Hogan <Kevin.Hogan.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Kristy.McBain.MP@aph.gov.au; Kylea.Tink.MP@aph.gov.au; Libby.Coker.MP@aph.gov.au;
Linda.Burney.MP@aph.gov.au; Lisa.Chesters.MP@aph.gov.au; Llew.O'Brien.MP@aph.gov.au;
Louise.Miller-Frost.MP@aph.gov.au; Luke.Gosling.MP@aph.gov.au;
Luke.Howarth.MP@aph.gov.au; Madeleine.King.MP@aph.gov.au; Maria Vamvakinou
<Maria.Vamvakinou.MP@aph.gov.au>; Marion.Scrymgour.MP@aph.gov.au; Mark Dreyfus
<mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au>; Mark.Butler.MP@aph.gov.au;
Mark.Coulton.MP@aph.gov.au; mary.doyle.mp@aph.gov.au; Matt.Burnell.MP@aph.gov.au;
Matt.Keogh.MP@aph.gov.au; Matt.Thistlethwaite.MP@aph.gov.au; Max.Chandler-
Mather.MP@aph.gov.au; Melissa.McIntosh.MP@aph.gov.au; Melissa.Price.MP@aph.gov.au;
Meryl.Swanson.MP@aph.gov.au; Michael McCormack MP
<michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au>; Michael.Sukkar.MP@aph.gov.au; Michelle Landry
<Michelle.Landry.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle.Ananda-Rajah.MP@aph.gov.au;
Michelle.Rowland.MP@aph.gov.au; Mike.Freelander.MP@aph.gov.au;
Milton.Dick.MP@aph.gov.au; Nola.Marino.MP@aph.gov.au; Pat.Conaghan.MP@aph.gov.au;
Pat.Conroy.MP@aph.gov.au; Patrick.Gorman.MP@aph.gov.au; Peta.Murphy.MP@aph.gov.au;
Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au; Peter.Khalil.MP@aph.gov.au;
Phillip.Thompson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rebekha.Sharkie.MP@aph.gov.au; RichardMarlesMP
<Richard.Marles.MP@aph.gov.au>; Rick.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rob Mitchell
<Rob.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ross.Vasta.MP@aph.gov.au;
Rowan.Ramsey.MP@aph.gov.au; Russell.Broadbent.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sally.Sitou.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Birrell.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Lim.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sam.Rae.MP@aph.gov.au; Scott Morrison <scott.morrison.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Scott.Buchholz.MP@aph.gov.au; Sharon.Claydon.MP@aph.gov.au; Shayne Neumann
<shayne.neumann.mp@aph.gov.au>; Smith, David (MP) <david.smith.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Sophie.Scamps.MP@aph.gov.au; Stephen Jones MP <Stephen.Jones.MP@aph.gov.au>;
stephen.bates.MP@aph.gov.au; Steve.Georganas.MP@aph.gov.au;
Susan.Templeman.MP@aph.gov.au; sussan.ley.mp@aph.gov.au;
Tania.Lawrence.MP@aph.gov.au; tanya.plibersek.mp@aph.gov.au;
ted.obrien.mp@aph.gov.au; Terry.Young.MP@aph.gov.au; Tim.Watts.MP@aph.gov.au;
Tony.Burke.MP@aph.gov.au; Tony.Pasin.MP@aph.gov.au; Tony.Zappia.MP@aph.gov.au;
Tracey.Roberts.MP@aph.gov.au; Warren.Entsch.MP@aph.gov.au;
Zali.Steggall.MP@aph.gov.au; Zaneta.Mascarenhas.MP@aph.gov.au;
Zoe.Daniel.MP@aph.gov.au; zoe.mckenzie.MP@aph.gov.au; Gallagher, Katy (Senator)
<senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au>; Helen Polley <senator.polley@aph.gov.au>; Marise


--- Page 86 ---

Payne <senator.payne@aph.gov.au>; McDonald, Susan (Senator)
<senator.mcdonald@aph.gov.au>; Richard Colbeck <senator.colbeck@aph.gov.au>;
senator.allman.payne@aph.gov.au; senator.anning@aph.gov.au; senator.askew@aph.gov.au;
senator.ayres@aph.gov.au; senator.babet@aph.gov.au; senator.barbara.pocock@aph.gov.au;
senator.bilyk@aph.gov.au; senator.bragg@aph.gov.au; senator.burston@aph.gov.au;
senator.bushby@aph.gov.au; senator.cadell@aph.gov.au; senator.canavan@aph.gov.au;
senator.cash@aph.gov.au; senator.ciccone@aph.gov.au; senator.cox@aph.gov.au;
senator.farrell@aph.gov.au; senator.faruqi@aph.gov.au; senator.fifield@aph.gov.au;
senator.gallacher@aph.gov.au; senator.georgiou@aph.gov.au; senator.gichuhi@aph.gov.au;
senator.green@aph.gov.au; senator.griff@aph.gov.au; senator.grogan@aph.gov.au;
senator.haines@aph.gov.au; senator.hanson-young@aph.gov.au; senator.hanson@aph.gov.au;
senator.henderson@aph.gov.au; Senator.Hinch@aph.gov.au; senator.hughes@aph.gov.au;
senator.hume@aph.gov.au; senator.lambie@aph.gov.au; senator.leyonjelm@aph.gov.au;
senator.lines@aph.gov.au; senator.marielle.smith@aph.gov.au;
senator.mcallister@aph.gov.au; senator.mccarthy@aph.gov.au; senator.mcgrath@aph.gov.au;
senator.mckenzie@aph.gov.au; senator.mclachlan@aph.gov.au;
senator.nampijinpaprice@aph.gov.au; senator.nash@aph.gov.au; senator.oneill@aph.gov.au;
senator.osullivan@aph.gov.au; senator.paterson@aph.gov.au; senator.patrick@aph.gov.au;
senator.payman@aph.gov.au; senator.pratt@aph.gov.au; senator.rennick@aph.gov.au;
senator.reynolds@aph.gov.au; senator.rhiannon@aph.gov.au; senator.rice@aph.gov.au;
senator.roberts@aph.gov.au; senator.ruston@aph.gov.au; senator.ryan@aph.gov.au;
senator.scarr@aph.gov.au; senator.seselja@aph.gov.au; senator.sheldon@aph.gov.au;
senator.sterle@aph.gov.au; senator.stewart@aph.gov.au; senator.thorpe@aph.gov.au;
senator.tink@aph.gov.au; senator.urquhart@aph.gov.au; senator.van@aph.gov.au;
senator.waers@aph.gov.au; senator.walsh@aph.gov.au; senator.waters@aph.gov.au;
senator.watt@aph.gov.au; senator.whish-wilson@aph.gov.au; senator.wong@aph.gov.au;
SenatorJohnWilliams <senator.williams@aph.gov.au>; Shoebridge, David (Senator Office)
<senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au>
Subject: Re: 2025 Australian Federal elections [SEC=OFFICIAL]

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government.
Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the
content is safe.

Dear Australian Electoral Commission,

Attached is a second letter for your immediate attention and action.

Kind regards
Chamber Committee
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

Disclaimer
This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged


--- Page 87 ---

material. Any review, disclosure, dissemination, re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance upon
this information is prohibited without Chamber Committee approval in writing. 
If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission including any
attachments

On Mon, 20 Jan 2025 at 18:03, Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au> wrote:

Dear Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

Attached please find the AEC’s response to your letter to the Acting Electoral
Commissioner.

Kind regards

Andrew Johnson
Chief Legal Officer
Legal Services Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

From: Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce, Inc. <norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com> 
Sent: Wednesday, 15 January 2025 8:27 PM
To: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>; Jeff Pope <jeff.pope@aec.gov.au>; 

 <

>

Cc: a.albanese.mp@aph.gov.au; Aaron.Violi.MP@aph.gov.au; Adam.Bandt.MP@aph.gov.au;
Alicia.Payne.MP@aph.gov.au; Alison.Byrnes.MP@aph.gov.au;
Allegra.Spender.MP@aph.gov.au; amanda.rishworth.mp@aph.gov.au; Andrew Leigh
<andrew.leigh.mp@aph.gov.au>; Andrew Wilkie <andrew.wilkie.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Andrew.Charlton.MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew.Gee.MP@aph.gov.au;
Andrew.Giles.MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew.Hastie.MP@aph.gov.au;
Andrew.Wallace.MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew.Willcox.MP@aph.gov.au;
Angie.Bell.MP@aph.gov.au; Angus.Taylor.MP@aph.gov.au; Anne.Aly.MP@aph.gov.au;
Anne.Stanley.MP@aph.gov.au; Anne.Webster.MP@aph.gov.au;
Barnaby.Joyce.MP@aph.gov.au; Bert.Vanmanen.MP@aph.gov.au;
bill.shorten.mp@aph.gov.au; Bob.Katter.MP@aph.gov.au;
Brendan.OConnor.MP@aph.gov.au; Brian.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au;
Bridget.Archer.MP@aph.gov.au; carina.garland.MP@aph.gov.au;
cassandra.fernando.MP@aph.gov.au; catherine.king.mp@aph.gov.au;
Chris.Bowen.MP@aph.gov.au; Clare O'Neil <Clare.ONeil.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Colin.Boyce.MP@aph.gov.au; Dai.Le.MP@aph.gov.au; Dan.Repacholi.MP@aph.gov.au;
Dan.Tehan.MP@aph.gov.au; Daniel.Mulino.MP@aph.gov.au;
Darren.Chester.MP@aph.gov.au; David.Coleman.MP@aph.gov.au;
David.Gillespie.MP@aph.gov.au; david.littleproud.mp@aph.gov.au; Elizabeth.Watson-
Brown.MP@aph.gov.au; Emma.McBride.MP@aph.gov.au; Fiona.Phillips.MP@aph.gov.au;
Gavin.Pearce.MP@aph.gov.au; Ged.Kearney.MP@aph.gov.au; Gordon.Reid.MP@aph.gov.au;

s 22s 22


--- Page 88 ---

Graham.Perrett.MP@aph.gov.au; Hamilton, Garth (MP) <garth.hamilton.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Helen.Haines.MP@aph.gov.au; Henry.Pike.MP@aph.gov.au; Ian Goodenough MP
<Ian.Goodenough.MP@aph.gov.au>; James.Stevens.MP@aph.gov.au;
Jason.Clare.MP@aph.gov.au; Jason.Wood.MP@aph.gov.au; Jenny.Ware.MP@aph.gov.au;
jerome.laxale.MP@aph.gov.au; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au;
Joanne.Ryan.MP@aph.gov.au; Josh.Burns.MP@aph.gov.au; Josh.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au;
Julian.Hill.MP@aph.gov.au; Julie.Collins.MP@aph.gov.au; Justine.Elliot.MP@aph.gov.au;
Karen.Andrews.MP@aph.gov.au; Kate.Chaney.MP@aph.gov.au;
Kate.Thwaites.MP@aph.gov.au; Keith.Pitt.MP@aph.gov.au; Keith.Wolahan.MP@aph.gov.au;
Kevin Hogan <Kevin.Hogan.MP@aph.gov.au>; Kristy.McBain.MP@aph.gov.au;
Kylea.Tink.MP@aph.gov.au; Libby.Coker.MP@aph.gov.au; Linda.Burney.MP@aph.gov.au;
Lisa.Chesters.MP@aph.gov.au; Llew.O'Brien.MP@aph.gov.au; Louise.Miller-
Frost.MP@aph.gov.au; Luke.Gosling.MP@aph.gov.au; Luke.Howarth.MP@aph.gov.au;
Madeleine.King.MP@aph.gov.au; Maria Vamvakinou <Maria.Vamvakinou.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Marion.Scrymgour.MP@aph.gov.au; Mark Dreyfus <mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Mark.Butler.MP@aph.gov.au; Mark.Coulton.MP@aph.gov.au; mary.doyle.mp@aph.gov.au;
Matt.Burnell.MP@aph.gov.au; Matt.Keogh.MP@aph.gov.au;
Matt.Thistlethwaite.MP@aph.gov.au; Max.Chandler-Mather.MP@aph.gov.au;
Melissa.McIntosh.MP@aph.gov.au; Melissa.Price.MP@aph.gov.au;
Meryl.Swanson.MP@aph.gov.au; Michael McCormack MP
<michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au>; Michael.Sukkar.MP@aph.gov.au; Michelle Landry
<Michelle.Landry.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle.Ananda-Rajah.MP@aph.gov.au;
Michelle.Rowland.MP@aph.gov.au; Mike.Freelander.MP@aph.gov.au;
Milton.Dick.MP@aph.gov.au; Nola.Marino.MP@aph.gov.au; Pat.Conaghan.MP@aph.gov.au;
Pat.Conroy.MP@aph.gov.au; Patrick.Gorman.MP@aph.gov.au;
Peta.Murphy.MP@aph.gov.au; Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au; Peter.Khalil.MP@aph.gov.au;
Phillip.Thompson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rebekha.Sharkie.MP@aph.gov.au; RichardMarlesMP
<Richard.Marles.MP@aph.gov.au>; Rick.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rob Mitchell
<Rob.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ross.Vasta.MP@aph.gov.au;
Rowan.Ramsey.MP@aph.gov.au; Russell.Broadbent.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sally.Sitou.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Birrell.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Lim.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sam.Rae.MP@aph.gov.au; Scott Morrison <scott.morrison.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Scott.Buchholz.MP@aph.gov.au; Sharon.Claydon.MP@aph.gov.au; Shayne Neumann
<shayne.neumann.mp@aph.gov.au>; Smith, David (MP) <david.smith.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Sophie.Scamps.MP@aph.gov.au; Stephen Jones MP <Stephen.Jones.MP@aph.gov.au>;
stephen.bates.MP@aph.gov.au; Steve.Georganas.MP@aph.gov.au;
Susan.Templeman.MP@aph.gov.au; sussan.ley.mp@aph.gov.au;
Tania.Lawrence.MP@aph.gov.au; tanya.plibersek.mp@aph.gov.au;
ted.obrien.mp@aph.gov.au; Terry.Young.MP@aph.gov.au; Tim.Watts.MP@aph.gov.au;
Tony.Burke.MP@aph.gov.au; Tony.Pasin.MP@aph.gov.au; Tony.Zappia.MP@aph.gov.au;
Tracey.Roberts.MP@aph.gov.au; Warren.Entsch.MP@aph.gov.au;
Zali.Steggall.MP@aph.gov.au; Zaneta.Mascarenhas.MP@aph.gov.au;
Zoe.Daniel.MP@aph.gov.au; zoe.mckenzie.MP@aph.gov.au; Gallagher, Katy (Senator)
<senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au>; Helen Polley <senator.polley@aph.gov.au>; Marise
Payne <senator.payne@aph.gov.au>; McDonald, Susan (Senator)
<senator.mcdonald@aph.gov.au>; Richard Colbeck <senator.colbeck@aph.gov.au>;


--- Page 89 ---

senator.abetz@aph.gov.au; senator.allman.payne@aph.gov.au; senator.anning@aph.gov.au;
senator.antic@aph.gov.au; senator.askew@aph.gov.au; senator.ayres@aph.gov.au;
senator.babet@aph.gov.au; senator.barbara.pocock@aph.gov.au;
senator.bilyk@aph.gov.au; senator.bragg@aph.gov.au; senator.burston@aph.gov.au;
senator.bushby@aph.gov.au; senator.cadell@aph.gov.au; senator.canavan@aph.gov.au;
senator.cash@aph.gov.au; senator.ciccone@aph.gov.au; senator.cox@aph.gov.au;
senator.farrell@aph.gov.au; senator.faruqi@aph.gov.au; senator.fifield@aph.gov.au;
senator.gallacher@aph.gov.au; senator.georgiou@aph.gov.au; senator.gichuhi@aph.gov.au;
senator.green@aph.gov.au; senator.griff@aph.gov.au; senator.grogan@aph.gov.au;
senator.haines@aph.gov.au; senator.hanson-young@aph.gov.au;
senator.hanson@aph.gov.au; senator.henderson@aph.gov.au; Senator.Hinch@aph.gov.au;
senator.hughes@aph.gov.au; senator.hume@aph.gov.au; senator.lambie@aph.gov.au;
senator.leyonjelm@aph.gov.au; senator.lines@aph.gov.au;
senator.marielle.smith@aph.gov.au; senator.mcallister@aph.gov.au;
senator.mccarthy@aph.gov.au; senator.mcgrath@aph.gov.au;
senator.mckenzie@aph.gov.au; senator.mclachlan@aph.gov.au;
senator.nampijinpaprice@aph.gov.au; senator.nash@aph.gov.au;
senator.oneill@aph.gov.au; senator.osullivan@aph.gov.au; senator.paterson@aph.gov.au;
senator.patrick@aph.gov.au; senator.payman@aph.gov.au; senator.pratt@aph.gov.au;
senator.rennick@aph.gov.au; senator.reynolds@aph.gov.au; senator.rhiannon@aph.gov.au;
senator.rice@aph.gov.au; senator.roberts@aph.gov.au; senator.ruston@aph.gov.au;
senator.ryan@aph.gov.au; senator.scarr@aph.gov.au; senator.seselja@aph.gov.au;
senator.sheldon@aph.gov.au; senator.sterle@aph.gov.au; senator.stewart@aph.gov.au;
senator.thorpe@aph.gov.au; senator.tink@aph.gov.au; senator.urquhart@aph.gov.au;
senator.van@aph.gov.au; senator.waers@aph.gov.au; senator.walsh@aph.gov.au;
senator.waters@aph.gov.au; senator.watt@aph.gov.au; senator.whish-wilson@aph.gov.au;
senator.wong@aph.gov.au; SenatorJohnWilliams <senator.williams@aph.gov.au>;
Shoebridge, David (Senator Office) <senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au>; 

 <

>; SMITH David SMITH

<senator.david.smith@aph.gov.au>; Steven Kennedy
<steven.kennedy@infrastructure.gov.au>; Canberra Office <Canberra@aec.gov.au>;

; nswecmedia@elections.nsw.gov.au; 
>; Kath Gleeson <kath.gleeson@aec.gov.au>;

<
Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au; Michael Lynch <michael.lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan
<thomas.ryan@aec.gov.au>; 
deanna.easton@pmc.gov.au; glyn.davis@pmc.gov.au; 

 andrew.walter@pmc.gov.au; paul.hupalo@pmc.gov.au;

; Attorney@ag.gov.au

Subject: 2025 Australian Federal elections - for urgent attention - Reply Requested

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government.
Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know
the content is safe.

Dear Australian Electoral Commission,

Attached is a letter for your immediate attention and action.

s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22


--- Page 90 ---

Please note a copy of this email has also gone to the Governor-General

Kind regards
Chamber Committee
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

)
|

a)

Disclaimer

This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged material. Any review,
disclosure, dissemination, re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance upon this information is prohibited without
Chamber Committee approval in writing.

If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission including any attachments

DISCLAIMER:

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email
and delete all copies. If this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that
error does not constitute waiver of any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of
information in the email or attachments.


--- Page 91 ---

s 42


--- Page 92 ---

From: Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce, Inc. <norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com>

 

Sent: Wednesday, January 15, 2025 8:27:27 PM
To: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>; Jeff Pope <jeff.pope@aec.gov.a as22

Cc: a.albanese.mp@aph.gov.au <a.albanese.mp@aph.gov.au>; Aaron.Violi. MP @aph.gov.au
<Aaron. VioliL MP @aph.gov.au>; Adam. Bandt.MP@aph.gov.au <Adam.Bandt.MP @aph.gov.au>;
Alicia.Payne. MP @aph.gov.au <Alicia.Payne. MP @aph.gov.au>; Alison.Byrnes. MP @aph.gov.au

 

<Alison.Byrnes.MP@aph.gov.au>; Allegra.Spender.MP@aph.gov.au

 

<Allegra.Spender.MP@aph.gov.au>; amanda.rishworth.mp@aph.gov.au

 

<amanda.rishworth.mp @aph.gov.au>; Andrew Leigh <andrew.leigh.mp@aph.gov.au>; Andrew Wilkie
<andrew.wilkie.mp@aph.gov.au>; Andrew.Charlton.MP@aph.gov.au

 

<Andrew.Charlton.MP@aph.gov.au>; Andrew.Gee.MP@aph.gov.au <Andrew.Gee.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Andrew. Giles. MP @aph.gov.au <Andrew.Giles MP @aph.gov.au>; Andrew.Hastie. MP @aph.gov.au

<Andrew.Hastie. MP @aph.gov.au>; Andrew.Wallace.MP@aph.gov.au

 

 

<Andrew.Wallace.MP@aph.gov.au>; Andrew. Willcox. MP @aph.gov.au
<Andrew. Willcox. MP @aph.gov.au>; Angie.Bell. MP@aph.gov.au <Angie.Bell. MP @aph.gov.au>;

 

Angus.Taylor. MP@aph.gov.au <Angus. Taylor. MP@aph.gov.au>; Anne.Aly.MP@aph.gov.au

 

<Anne.Aly.MP@aph.gov.au>; Anne.Stanley.MP@aph.gov.au <Anne.Stanley.MP@aph.gov.au>;

 

Anne.Webster.MP@aph.gov.au <Anne.Webster.MP@aph.gov.au>; Barnaby.Joyce. MP @aph.gov.au
<Barnaby Joyce. MP @aph.gov.au>; Bert. Vanmanen.MP@aph gov.a
<Bert.Vanmanen.MP@aph.gov.au>; bill.shorten.mp@aph.gov.au <bill.shorten.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Bob.Katter. MP @aph.gov.au <Bob.Katter. MP @aph.gov.au>; Brendan.OConnor.MP@aph.gov.au
<Brendan.OConnor.MP@aph.gov.au>; Brian.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au
<Brian.Mitchell. MP @aph.gov.au>; Bridget.Archer.MP@aph.gov.au
<Bridget.Archer.MP@aph.gov.au>; carina.garland.MP@aph.gov.au <carina.garland. MP@aph.gov.au>;

 

 

 

 

cassandra.fernando.MP @aph.gov.au <cassandra.fernando.MP@aph.gov.au>;

catherine. king. mp @aph.gov.au <catherine. king. mp@aph.gov.au>; Chris. Bowen.MP@aph.gov.au
<Chris.Bowen.MP @aph.gov.au>; Clare O'Neil <Clare.ONeil.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Colin.Boyce. MP @aph.gov.au <Colin.Boyce.MP@aph.gov.au>; Dai.Le. MP@aph.gov.au

 

 

<Dai.Le. MP @aph.gov.au>; Dan.Repacholi.MP@aph.gov.au <Dan.Repacholi.MP@aph.gov.au>;


--- Page 93 ---

Dan.Tehan.MP@aph.gov.au <Dan.Tehan.MP@aph.gov.au>; Daniel.Mulino.MP@aph.gov.au
<Daniel.Mulino.MP@aph.gov.au>; Darren.Chester.MP@aph.gov.au
<Darren.Chester.MP@aph.gov.au>; David.Coleman.MP@aph.gov.au
<David.Coleman.MP@aph.gov.au>; David.Gillespie.MP@aph.gov.au
<David.Gillespie.MP@aph.gov.au>; david.littleproud.mp@aph.gov.au
<david.littleproud.mp@aph.gov.au>; Elizabeth.Watson-Brown.MP@aph.gov.au <Elizabeth.Watson-
Brown.MP@aph.gov.au>; Emma.McBride.MP@aph.gov.au <Emma.McBride.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Fiona.Phillips.MP@aph.gov.au <Fiona.Phillips.MP@aph.gov.au>; Gavin.Pearce.MP@aph.gov.au
<Gavin.Pearce.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ged.Kearney.MP@aph.gov.au <Ged.Kearney.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Gordon.Reid.MP@aph.gov.au <Gordon.Reid.MP@aph.gov.au>; Graham.Perrett.MP@aph.gov.au
<Graham.Perrett.MP@aph.gov.au>; Hamilton, Garth (MP) <garth.hamilton.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Helen.Haines.MP@aph.gov.au <Helen.Haines.MP@aph.gov.au>; Henry.Pike.MP@aph.gov.au
<Henry.Pike.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ian Goodenough MP <Ian.Goodenough.MP@aph.gov.au>;
James.Stevens.MP@aph.gov.au <James.Stevens.MP@aph.gov.au>; Jason.Clare.MP@aph.gov.au
<Jason.Clare.MP@aph.gov.au>; Jason.Wood.MP@aph.gov.au <Jason.Wood.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Jenny.Ware.MP@aph.gov.au <Jenny.Ware.MP@aph.gov.au>; jerome.laxale.MP@aph.gov.au
<jerome.laxale.MP@aph.gov.au>; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au <Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Joanne.Ryan.MP@aph.gov.au <Joanne.Ryan.MP@aph.gov.au>; Josh.Burns.MP@aph.gov.au
<Josh.Burns.MP@aph.gov.au>; Josh.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au <Josh.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Julian.Hill.MP@aph.gov.au <Julian.Hill.MP@aph.gov.au>; Julie.Collins.MP@aph.gov.au
<Julie.Collins.MP@aph.gov.au>; Justine.Elliot.MP@aph.gov.au <Justine.Elliot.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Karen.Andrews.MP@aph.gov.au <Karen.Andrews.MP@aph.gov.au>; Kate.Chaney.MP@aph.gov.au
<Kate.Chaney.MP@aph.gov.au>; Kate.Thwaites.MP@aph.gov.au <Kate.Thwaites.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Keith.Pitt.MP@aph.gov.au <Keith.Pitt.MP@aph.gov.au>; Keith.Wolahan.MP@aph.gov.au
<Keith.Wolahan.MP@aph.gov.au>; Kevin Hogan <Kevin.Hogan.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Kristy.McBain.MP@aph.gov.au <Kristy.McBain.MP@aph.gov.au>; Kylea.Tink.MP@aph.gov.au
<Kylea.Tink.MP@aph.gov.au>; Libby.Coker.MP@aph.gov.au <Libby.Coker.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Linda.Burney.MP@aph.gov.au <Linda.Burney.MP@aph.gov.au>; Lisa.Chesters.MP@aph.gov.au
<Lisa.Chesters.MP@aph.gov.au>; Llew.O'Brien.MP@aph.gov.au <Llew.O'Brien.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Louise.Miller-Frost.MP@aph.gov.au <Louise.Miller-Frost.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Luke.Gosling.MP@aph.gov.au <Luke.Gosling.MP@aph.gov.au>; Luke.Howarth.MP@aph.gov.au
<Luke.Howarth.MP@aph.gov.au>; Madeleine.King.MP@aph.gov.au
<Madeleine.King.MP@aph.gov.au>; Maria Vamvakinou <Maria.Vamvakinou.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Marion.Scrymgour.MP@aph.gov.au <Marion.Scrymgour.MP@aph.gov.au>; Mark Dreyfus
<mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au>; Mark.Butler.MP@aph.gov.au <Mark.Butler.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Mark.Coulton.MP@aph.gov.au <Mark.Coulton.MP@aph.gov.au>; mary.doyle.mp@aph.gov.au
<mary.doyle.mp@aph.gov.au>; Matt.Burnell.MP@aph.gov.au <Matt.Burnell.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Matt.Keogh.MP@aph.gov.au <Matt.Keogh.MP@aph.gov.au>; Matt.Thistlethwaite.MP@aph.gov.au
<Matt.Thistlethwaite.MP@aph.gov.au>; Max.Chandler-Mather.MP@aph.gov.au <Max.Chandler-
Mather.MP@aph.gov.au>; Melissa.McIntosh.MP@aph.gov.au <Melissa.McIntosh.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Melissa.Price.MP@aph.gov.au <Melissa.Price.MP@aph.gov.au>; Meryl.Swanson.MP@aph.gov.au
<Meryl.Swanson.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michael McCormack MP <michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Michael.Sukkar.MP@aph.gov.au <Michael.Sukkar.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle Landry
<Michelle.Landry.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle.Ananda-Rajah.MP@aph.gov.au <Michelle.Ananda-
Rajah.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle.Rowland.MP@aph.gov.au <Michelle.Rowland.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Mike.Freelander.MP@aph.gov.au <Mike.Freelander.MP@aph.gov.au>; Milton.Dick.MP@aph.gov.au
<Milton.Dick.MP@aph.gov.au>; Nola.Marino.MP@aph.gov.au <Nola.Marino.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Pat.Conaghan.MP@aph.gov.au <Pat.Conaghan.MP@aph.gov.au>; Pat.Conroy.MP@aph.gov.au
<Pat.Conroy.MP@aph.gov.au>; Patrick.Gorman.MP@aph.gov.au <Patrick.Gorman.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Peta.Murphy.MP@aph.gov.au <Peta.Murphy.MP@aph.gov.au>; Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au
<Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au>; Peter.Khalil.MP@aph.gov.au <Peter.Khalil.MP@aph.gov.au>;


--- Page 94 ---

Phillip.Thompson.MP@aph.gov.au <Phillip.Thompson.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Rebekha.Sharkie.MP@aph.gov.au <Rebekha.Sharkie.MP@aph.gov.au>; RichardMarlesMP
<Richard.Marles.MP@aph.gov.au>; Rick.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au <Rick.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au>; Rob
Mitchell <Rob.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ross.Vasta.MP@aph.gov.au <Ross.Vasta.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Rowan.Ramsey.MP@aph.gov.au <Rowan.Ramsey.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Russell.Broadbent.MP@aph.gov.au <Russell.Broadbent.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Sally.Sitou.MP@aph.gov.au <Sally.Sitou.MP@aph.gov.au>; Sam.Birrell.MP@aph.gov.au
<Sam.Birrell.MP@aph.gov.au>; Sam.Lim.MP@aph.gov.au <Sam.Lim.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Sam.Rae.MP@aph.gov.au <Sam.Rae.MP@aph.gov.au>; Scott Morrison
<scott.morrison.mp@aph.gov.au>; Scott.Buchholz.MP@aph.gov.au
<Scott.Buchholz.MP@aph.gov.au>; Sharon.Claydon.MP@aph.gov.au
<Sharon.Claydon.MP@aph.gov.au>; Shayne Neumann <shayne.neumann.mp@aph.gov.au>; Smith,
David (MP) <david.smith.mp@aph.gov.au>; Sophie.Scamps.MP@aph.gov.au
<Sophie.Scamps.MP@aph.gov.au>; Stephen Jones MP <Stephen.Jones.MP@aph.gov.au>;
stephen.bates.MP@aph.gov.au <stephen.bates.MP@aph.gov.au>; Steve.Georganas.MP@aph.gov.au
<Steve.Georganas.MP@aph.gov.au>; Susan.Templeman.MP@aph.gov.au
<Susan.Templeman.MP@aph.gov.au>; sussan.ley.mp@aph.gov.au <sussan.ley.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Tania.Lawrence.MP@aph.gov.au <Tania.Lawrence.MP@aph.gov.au>;
tanya.plibersek.mp@aph.gov.au <tanya.plibersek.mp@aph.gov.au>; ted.obrien.mp@aph.gov.au
<ted.obrien.mp@aph.gov.au>; Terry.Young.MP@aph.gov.au <Terry.Young.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Tim.Watts.MP@aph.gov.au <Tim.Watts.MP@aph.gov.au>; Tony.Burke.MP@aph.gov.au
<Tony.Burke.MP@aph.gov.au>; Tony.Pasin.MP@aph.gov.au <Tony.Pasin.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Tony.Zappia.MP@aph.gov.au <Tony.Zappia.MP@aph.gov.au>; Tracey.Roberts.MP@aph.gov.au
<Tracey.Roberts.MP@aph.gov.au>; Warren.Entsch.MP@aph.gov.au
<Warren.Entsch.MP@aph.gov.au>; Zali.Steggall.MP@aph.gov.au <Zali.Steggall.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Zaneta.Mascarenhas.MP@aph.gov.au <Zaneta.Mascarenhas.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Zoe.Daniel.MP@aph.gov.au <Zoe.Daniel.MP@aph.gov.au>; zoe.mckenzie.MP@aph.gov.au
<zoe.mckenzie.MP@aph.gov.au>; Gallagher, Katy (Senator) <senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au>;
Helen Polley <senator.polley@aph.gov.au>; Marise Payne <senator.payne@aph.gov.au>; McDonald,
Susan (Senator) <senator.mcdonald@aph.gov.au>; Richard Colbeck <senator.colbeck@aph.gov.au>;
senator.abetz@aph.gov.au <senator.abetz@aph.gov.au>; senator.allman.payne@aph.gov.au
<senator.allman.payne@aph.gov.au>; senator.anning@aph.gov.au <senator.anning@aph.gov.au>;
senator.antic@aph.gov.au <senator.antic@aph.gov.au>; senator.askew@aph.gov.au
<senator.askew@aph.gov.au>; senator.ayres@aph.gov.au <senator.ayres@aph.gov.au>;
senator.babet@aph.gov.au <senator.babet@aph.gov.au>; senator.barbara.pocock@aph.gov.au
<senator.barbara.pocock@aph.gov.au>; senator.bilyk@aph.gov.au <senator.bilyk@aph.gov.au>;
senator.bragg@aph.gov.au <senator.bragg@aph.gov.au>; senator.burston@aph.gov.au
<senator.burston@aph.gov.au>; senator.bushby@aph.gov.au <senator.bushby@aph.gov.au>;
senator.cadell@aph.gov.au <senator.cadell@aph.gov.au>; senator.canavan@aph.gov.au
<senator.canavan@aph.gov.au>; senator.cash@aph.gov.au <senator.cash@aph.gov.au>;
senator.ciccone@aph.gov.au <senator.ciccone@aph.gov.au>; senator.cox@aph.gov.au
<senator.cox@aph.gov.au>; senator.farrell@aph.gov.au <senator.farrell@aph.gov.au>;
senator.faruqi@aph.gov.au <senator.faruqi@aph.gov.au>; senator.fifield@aph.gov.au
<senator.fifield@aph.gov.au>; senator.gallacher@aph.gov.au <senator.gallacher@aph.gov.au>;
senator.georgiou@aph.gov.au <senator.georgiou@aph.gov.au>; senator.gichuhi@aph.gov.au
<senator.gichuhi@aph.gov.au>; senator.green@aph.gov.au <senator.green@aph.gov.au>;
senator.griff@aph.gov.au <senator.griff@aph.gov.au>; senator.grogan@aph.gov.au
<senator.grogan@aph.gov.au>; senator.haines@aph.gov.au <senator.haines@aph.gov.au>;
senator.hanson-young@aph.gov.au <senator.hanson-young@aph.gov.au>;
senator.hanson@aph.gov.au <senator.hanson@aph.gov.au>; senator.henderson@aph.gov.au
<senator.henderson@aph.gov.au>; Senator.Hinch@aph.gov.au <Senator.Hinch@aph.gov.au>;


--- Page 95 ---

senator.hughes@aph.gov.au <senator.hughes@aph.gov.au>; senator.hume@aph.gov.au
<senator.hume@aph.gov.au>; senator.lambie@aph.gov.au <senator.lambie@aph.gov.au>;
senator.leyonjelm@aph.gov.au <senator.leyonjelm@aph.gov.au>; senator.lines@aph.gov.au
<senator.lines@aph.gov.au>; senator.marielle.smith@aph.gov.au
<senator.marielle.smith@aph.gov.au>; senator.mcallister@aph.gov.au
<senator.mcallister@aph.gov.au>; senator.mccarthy@aph.gov.au <senator.mccarthy@aph.gov.au>;
senator.mcgrath@aph.gov.au <senator.mcgrath@aph.gov.au>; senator.mckenzie@aph.gov.au
<senator.mckenzie@aph.gov.au>; senator.mclachlan@aph.gov.au <senator.mclachlan@aph.gov.au>;
senator.nampijinpaprice@aph.gov.au <senator.nampijinpaprice@aph.gov.au>;
senator.nash@aph.gov.au <senator.nash@aph.gov.au>; senator.oneill@aph.gov.au
<senator.oneill@aph.gov.au>; senator.osullivan@aph.gov.au <senator.osullivan@aph.gov.au>;
senator.paterson@aph.gov.au <senator.paterson@aph.gov.au>; senator.patrick@aph.gov.au
<senator.patrick@aph.gov.au>; senator.payman@aph.gov.au <senator.payman@aph.gov.au>;
senator.pratt@aph.gov.au <senator.pratt@aph.gov.au>; senator.rennick@aph.gov.au
<senator.rennick@aph.gov.au>; senator.reynolds@aph.gov.au <senator.reynolds@aph.gov.au>;
senator.rhiannon@aph.gov.au <senator.rhiannon@aph.gov.au>; senator.rice@aph.gov.au
<senator.rice@aph.gov.au>; senator.roberts@aph.gov.au <senator.roberts@aph.gov.au>;
senator.ruston@aph.gov.au <senator.ruston@aph.gov.au>; senator.ryan@aph.gov.au
<senator.ryan@aph.gov.au>; senator.scarr@aph.gov.au <senator.scarr@aph.gov.au>;
senator.seselja@aph.gov.au <senator.seselja@aph.gov.au>; senator.sheldon@aph.gov.au
<senator.sheldon@aph.gov.au>; senator.sterle@aph.gov.au <senator.sterle@aph.gov.au>;
senator.stewart@aph.gov.au <senator.stewart@aph.gov.au>; senator.thorpe@aph.gov.au
<senator.thorpe@aph.gov.au>; senator.tink@aph.gov.au <senator.tink@aph.gov.au>;
senator.urquhart@aph.gov.au <senator.urquhart@aph.gov.au>; senator.van@aph.gov.au
<senator.van@aph.gov.au>; senator.waers@aph.gov.au <senator.waers@aph.gov.au>;
senator.walsh@aph.gov.au <senator.walsh@aph.gov.au>; senator.waters@aph.gov.au
<senator.waters@aph.gov.au>; senator.watt@aph.gov.au <senator.watt@aph.gov.au>;
senator.whish-wilson@aph.gov.au <senator.whish-wilson@aph.gov.au>; senator.wong@aph.gov.au
<senator.wong@aph.gov.au>; SenatorJohnWilliams <senator.williams@aph.gov.au>; Shoebridge,
David (Senator Office) <senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au>; 
<
>; SMITH David SMITH <senator.david.smith@aph.gov.au>; Steven
Kennedy <steven.kennedy@infrastructure.gov.au>; Canberra Office <Canberra@aec.gov.au>;

<nswecmedia@elections.nsw.gov.au>; 
<kath.gleeson@aec.gov.au>; Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au <Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au>; Michael Lynch
<michael.lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan <thomas.ryan@aec.gov.au>; 

 <

>; nswecmedia@elections.nsw.gov.au
; Kath Gleeson

glyn.davis@pmc.gov.au <glyn.davis@pmc.gov.au>; 

>; deanna.easton@pmc.gov.au <deanna.easton@pmc.gov.au>;

andrew.walter@pmc.gov.au <andrew.walter@pmc.gov.au>; paul.hupalo@pmc.gov.au
<paul.hupalo@pmc.gov.au>; 
Attorney@ag.gov.au <Attorney@ag.gov.au>
Subject: 2025 Australian Federal elections - for urgent attention - Reply Requested

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government.
Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the
content is safe.

Dear Australian Electoral Commission,

Attached is a letter for your immediate attention and action.

s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22


--- Page 96 ---

Please note a copy of this email has also gone to the Governor-General

Kind regards
Chamber Committee
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

1}

Disclaimer

This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged material. Any review, disclosure,
dissemination, re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance upon this information is prohibited without Chamber Committee
approval in writing.

If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission including any attachments


--- Page 97 ---

s 42


--- Page 98 ---

From: Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce, Inc. <norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com>

Sent: Wednesday, January 15, 2025 8:27:27 PM
To: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>; Jeff Pope <jeff.pope@aec gov .au>;

Cc: a.albanese.mp@aph.gov.au <a.albanese.mp@aph.gov.au>; Aaron. Violi. MP @aph.gov.au
<Aaron.Violi.MP@aph.gov.au>; Adam.Bandt.MP@aph.gov.au <Adam.Bandt.MP @aph.gov.au>;
Alicia.Payne.MP@aph.gov.au <Alicia. Payne. MP @aph.gov.au>; Alison.Byrnes. MP@aph.gov.au
<Alison.Byrnes. MP @aph.gov.au>; Allegra.Spender.MP@aph.gov.au
<Allegra.Spender.MP@aph.gov.au>; amanda.rishworth.mp@aph.gov.au

<amanda.rishworth.mp @aph.gov.au>; Andrew Leigh <andrew.leigh.mp@aph.gov.au>; Andrew Wilkie
<andrew.wilkie.mp@aph.gov.au>; Andrew.Charlton.MP@aph.gov.au

<Andrew.Charlton.MP @aph.gov.au>; Andrew.Gee.MP @aph.gov.au <Andrew.Gee.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Andrew.Giles. MP @aph.gov.au <Andrew.Giles. MP@aph.gov.au>; Andrew.Hastie. MP@aph.gov.au
<Andrew. Hastie. MP@aph.gov.au>; Andrew.Wallace. MP @aph.gov.au
<Andrew.Wallace.MP@aph.gov.au>; Andrew. Willcox. MP @aph.gov.au
<Andrew.Willcox. MP @aph.gov.au>; Angie. Bell. MP@aph.gov.au <Angie. Bell. MP@aph.gov.au>;
Angus.Taylor. MP @aph.gov.au <Angus. Taylor. MP@aph.gov.au>; Anne.Aly. MP @aph.gov.au
<Anne.Aly.MP @aph.gov.au>; Anne.Stanley. MP @aph.gov.au <Anne.Stanley.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Anne.Webster.MP @aph.gov.au <Anne.Webster.MP@aph.gov.au>; Barnaby.Joyce. MP @aph.gov.au
<Barnaby.Joyce.MP@aph.gov.au>; Bert. Vanmanen.MP@aph.gov.au

<Bert. Vanmanen.MP @aph.gov.au>; bill.shorten.mp@aph.gov.au <bill.shorten.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Bob.Katter. MP@aph.gov.au <Bob.Katter. MP@aph.gov.au>; Brendan.OConnor.MP@aph.gov.au
<Brendan.OConnor.MP@aph.gov.au>; Brian.Mitchell. MP @aph.gov.au
<Brian.Mitchell. MP @aph.gov.au>; Bridget.Archer. MP @aph.gov.au

<Bridget.Archer. MP@aph.gov.au>; carina.garland. MP@aph.gov.au <carina.garland.MP@aph.gov.au>;
cassandra.fernando.MP@aph.gov.au <cassandra.fernando.MP@aph.gov.au>;
catherine.king.mp@aph.gov.au <catherine.king. mp@aph.gov.au>; Chris.Bowen.MP@aph.gov.au
<Chris.Bowen.MP@aph.gov.au>; Clare O'Neil <Clare.ONeil. MP@aph.gov.au>;

Colin. Boyce. MP @aph.gov.au <Colin.Boyce. MP @aph.gov.au>; Dai.Le.MP@aph.gov.au
<Dai.Le.MP@aph.gov.au>; Dan.Repacholi.MP@aph.gov.au <Dan.Repacholi.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Dan.Tehan.MP @aph.gov.au <Dan.Tehan.MP@aph.gov.au>; Daniel. Mulino. MP @aph.gov.au
<Daniel. Mulino. MP@aph.gov.au>; Darren.Chester.MP@aph.gov.au

<Darren.Chester.MP @aph.gov.au>; David.Coleman.MP @aph.gov.au
<David.Coleman.MP@aph.gov.au>; David.Gillespie. MP@aph.gov.au

<David.Gillespie. MP@aph.gov.au>; david.littleproud. mp@aph.gov.au
<david.littleproud.mp@aph.gov.au>; Elizabeth.Watson-Brown, MP @aph.gov.au <Elizabeth. Watson-
Brown.MP@aph.gov.au>; Emma.McBride.MP@aph.gov.au <Emma.McBride.MP @aph.gov.au>;


--- Page 99 ---

Fiona.Phillips.MP@aph.gov.au <Fiona.Phillips.MP@aph.gov.au>; Gavin.Pearce.MP@aph.gov.au
<Gavin.Pearce.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ged.Kearney.MP@aph.gov.au <Ged.Kearney.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Gordon.Reid.MP@aph.gov.au <Gordon.Reid.MP@aph.gov.au>; Graham.Perrett.MP@aph.gov.au
<Graham.Perrett.MP@aph.gov.au>; Hamilton, Garth (MP) <garth.hamilton.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Helen.Haines.MP@aph.gov.au <Helen.Haines.MP@aph.gov.au>; Henry.Pike.MP@aph.gov.au
<Henry.Pike.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ian Goodenough MP <Ian.Goodenough.MP@aph.gov.au>;
James.Stevens.MP@aph.gov.au <James.Stevens.MP@aph.gov.au>; Jason.Clare.MP@aph.gov.au
<Jason.Clare.MP@aph.gov.au>; Jason.Wood.MP@aph.gov.au <Jason.Wood.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Jenny.Ware.MP@aph.gov.au <Jenny.Ware.MP@aph.gov.au>; jerome.laxale.MP@aph.gov.au
<jerome.laxale.MP@aph.gov.au>; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au <Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Joanne.Ryan.MP@aph.gov.au <Joanne.Ryan.MP@aph.gov.au>; Josh.Burns.MP@aph.gov.au
<Josh.Burns.MP@aph.gov.au>; Josh.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au <Josh.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Julian.Hill.MP@aph.gov.au <Julian.Hill.MP@aph.gov.au>; Julie.Collins.MP@aph.gov.au
<Julie.Collins.MP@aph.gov.au>; Justine.Elliot.MP@aph.gov.au <Justine.Elliot.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Karen.Andrews.MP@aph.gov.au <Karen.Andrews.MP@aph.gov.au>; Kate.Chaney.MP@aph.gov.au
<Kate.Chaney.MP@aph.gov.au>; Kate.Thwaites.MP@aph.gov.au <Kate.Thwaites.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Keith.Pitt.MP@aph.gov.au <Keith.Pitt.MP@aph.gov.au>; Keith.Wolahan.MP@aph.gov.au
<Keith.Wolahan.MP@aph.gov.au>; Kevin Hogan <Kevin.Hogan.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Kristy.McBain.MP@aph.gov.au <Kristy.McBain.MP@aph.gov.au>; Kylea.Tink.MP@aph.gov.au
<Kylea.Tink.MP@aph.gov.au>; Libby.Coker.MP@aph.gov.au <Libby.Coker.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Linda.Burney.MP@aph.gov.au <Linda.Burney.MP@aph.gov.au>; Lisa.Chesters.MP@aph.gov.au
<Lisa.Chesters.MP@aph.gov.au>; Llew.O'Brien.MP@aph.gov.au <Llew.O'Brien.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Louise.Miller-Frost.MP@aph.gov.au <Louise.Miller-Frost.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Luke.Gosling.MP@aph.gov.au <Luke.Gosling.MP@aph.gov.au>; Luke.Howarth.MP@aph.gov.au
<Luke.Howarth.MP@aph.gov.au>; Madeleine.King.MP@aph.gov.au
<Madeleine.King.MP@aph.gov.au>; Maria Vamvakinou <Maria.Vamvakinou.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Marion.Scrymgour.MP@aph.gov.au <Marion.Scrymgour.MP@aph.gov.au>; Mark Dreyfus
<mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au>; Mark.Butler.MP@aph.gov.au <Mark.Butler.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Mark.Coulton.MP@aph.gov.au <Mark.Coulton.MP@aph.gov.au>; mary.doyle.mp@aph.gov.au
<mary.doyle.mp@aph.gov.au>; Matt.Burnell.MP@aph.gov.au <Matt.Burnell.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Matt.Keogh.MP@aph.gov.au <Matt.Keogh.MP@aph.gov.au>; Matt.Thistlethwaite.MP@aph.gov.au
<Matt.Thistlethwaite.MP@aph.gov.au>; Max.Chandler-Mather.MP@aph.gov.au <Max.Chandler-
Mather.MP@aph.gov.au>; Melissa.McIntosh.MP@aph.gov.au <Melissa.McIntosh.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Melissa.Price.MP@aph.gov.au <Melissa.Price.MP@aph.gov.au>; Meryl.Swanson.MP@aph.gov.au
<Meryl.Swanson.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michael McCormack MP <michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Michael.Sukkar.MP@aph.gov.au <Michael.Sukkar.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle Landry
<Michelle.Landry.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle.Ananda-Rajah.MP@aph.gov.au <Michelle.Ananda-
Rajah.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle.Rowland.MP@aph.gov.au <Michelle.Rowland.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Mike.Freelander.MP@aph.gov.au <Mike.Freelander.MP@aph.gov.au>; Milton.Dick.MP@aph.gov.au
<Milton.Dick.MP@aph.gov.au>; Nola.Marino.MP@aph.gov.au <Nola.Marino.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Pat.Conaghan.MP@aph.gov.au <Pat.Conaghan.MP@aph.gov.au>; Pat.Conroy.MP@aph.gov.au
<Pat.Conroy.MP@aph.gov.au>; Patrick.Gorman.MP@aph.gov.au <Patrick.Gorman.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Peta.Murphy.MP@aph.gov.au <Peta.Murphy.MP@aph.gov.au>; Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au
<Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au>; Peter.Khalil.MP@aph.gov.au <Peter.Khalil.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Phillip.Thompson.MP@aph.gov.au <Phillip.Thompson.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Rebekha.Sharkie.MP@aph.gov.au <Rebekha.Sharkie.MP@aph.gov.au>; RichardMarlesMP
<Richard.Marles.MP@aph.gov.au>; Rick.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au <Rick.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au>; Rob
Mitchell <Rob.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ross.Vasta.MP@aph.gov.au <Ross.Vasta.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Rowan.Ramsey.MP@aph.gov.au <Rowan.Ramsey.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Russell.Broadbent.MP@aph.gov.au <Russell.Broadbent.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Sally.Sitou.MP@aph.gov.au <Sally.Sitou.MP@aph.gov.au>; Sam.Birrell.MP@aph.gov.au
<Sam.Birrell.MP@aph.gov.au>; Sam.Lim.MP@aph.gov.au <Sam.Lim.MP@aph.gov.au>;


--- Page 100 ---

Sam.Rae.MP@aph.gov.au <Sam.Rae.MP@aph.gov.au>; Scott Morrison
<scott.morrison.mp@aph.gov.au>; Scott.Buchholz.MP@aph.gov.au
<Scott.Buchholz.MP@aph.gov.au>; Sharon.Claydon.MP@aph.gov.au
<Sharon.Claydon.MP@aph.gov.au>; Shayne Neumann <shayne.neumann.mp@aph.gov.au>; Smith,
David (MP) <david.smith.mp@aph.gov.au>; Sophie.Scamps.MP@aph.gov.au
<Sophie.Scamps.MP@aph.gov.au>; Stephen Jones MP <Stephen.Jones.MP@aph.gov.au>;
stephen.bates.MP@aph.gov.au <stephen.bates.MP@aph.gov.au>; Steve.Georganas.MP@aph.gov.au
<Steve.Georganas.MP@aph.gov.au>; Susan.Templeman.MP@aph.gov.au
<Susan.Templeman.MP@aph.gov.au>; sussan.ley.mp@aph.gov.au <sussan.ley.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Tania.Lawrence.MP@aph.gov.au <Tania.Lawrence.MP@aph.gov.au>;
tanya.plibersek.mp@aph.gov.au <tanya.plibersek.mp@aph.gov.au>; ted.obrien.mp@aph.gov.au
<ted.obrien.mp@aph.gov.au>; Terry.Young.MP@aph.gov.au <Terry.Young.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Tim.Watts.MP@aph.gov.au <Tim.Watts.MP@aph.gov.au>; Tony.Burke.MP@aph.gov.au
<Tony.Burke.MP@aph.gov.au>; Tony.Pasin.MP@aph.gov.au <Tony.Pasin.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Tony.Zappia.MP@aph.gov.au <Tony.Zappia.MP@aph.gov.au>; Tracey.Roberts.MP@aph.gov.au
<Tracey.Roberts.MP@aph.gov.au>; Warren.Entsch.MP@aph.gov.au
<Warren.Entsch.MP@aph.gov.au>; Zali.Steggall.MP@aph.gov.au <Zali.Steggall.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Zaneta.Mascarenhas.MP@aph.gov.au <Zaneta.Mascarenhas.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Zoe.Daniel.MP@aph.gov.au <Zoe.Daniel.MP@aph.gov.au>; zoe.mckenzie.MP@aph.gov.au
<zoe.mckenzie.MP@aph.gov.au>; Gallagher, Katy (Senator) <senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au>;
Helen Polley <senator.polley@aph.gov.au>; Marise Payne <senator.payne@aph.gov.au>; McDonald,
Susan (Senator) <senator.mcdonald@aph.gov.au>; Richard Colbeck <senator.colbeck@aph.gov.au>;
senator.abetz@aph.gov.au <senator.abetz@aph.gov.au>; senator.allman.payne@aph.gov.au
<senator.allman.payne@aph.gov.au>; senator.anning@aph.gov.au <senator.anning@aph.gov.au>;
senator.antic@aph.gov.au <senator.antic@aph.gov.au>; senator.askew@aph.gov.au
<senator.askew@aph.gov.au>; senator.ayres@aph.gov.au <senator.ayres@aph.gov.au>;
senator.babet@aph.gov.au <senator.babet@aph.gov.au>; senator.barbara.pocock@aph.gov.au
<senator.barbara.pocock@aph.gov.au>; senator.bilyk@aph.gov.au <senator.bilyk@aph.gov.au>;
senator.bragg@aph.gov.au <senator.bragg@aph.gov.au>; senator.burston@aph.gov.au
<senator.burston@aph.gov.au>; senator.bushby@aph.gov.au <senator.bushby@aph.gov.au>;
senator.cadell@aph.gov.au <senator.cadell@aph.gov.au>; senator.canavan@aph.gov.au
<senator.canavan@aph.gov.au>; senator.cash@aph.gov.au <senator.cash@aph.gov.au>;
senator.ciccone@aph.gov.au <senator.ciccone@aph.gov.au>; senator.cox@aph.gov.au
<senator.cox@aph.gov.au>; senator.farrell@aph.gov.au <senator.farrell@aph.gov.au>;
senator.faruqi@aph.gov.au <senator.faruqi@aph.gov.au>; senator.fifield@aph.gov.au
<senator.fifield@aph.gov.au>; senator.gallacher@aph.gov.au <senator.gallacher@aph.gov.au>;
senator.georgiou@aph.gov.au <senator.georgiou@aph.gov.au>; senator.gichuhi@aph.gov.au
<senator.gichuhi@aph.gov.au>; senator.green@aph.gov.au <senator.green@aph.gov.au>;
senator.griff@aph.gov.au <senator.griff@aph.gov.au>; senator.grogan@aph.gov.au
<senator.grogan@aph.gov.au>; senator.haines@aph.gov.au <senator.haines@aph.gov.au>;
senator.hanson-young@aph.gov.au <senator.hanson-young@aph.gov.au>;
senator.hanson@aph.gov.au <senator.hanson@aph.gov.au>; senator.henderson@aph.gov.au
<senator.henderson@aph.gov.au>; Senator.Hinch@aph.gov.au <Senator.Hinch@aph.gov.au>;
senator.hughes@aph.gov.au <senator.hughes@aph.gov.au>; senator.hume@aph.gov.au
<senator.hume@aph.gov.au>; senator.lambie@aph.gov.au <senator.lambie@aph.gov.au>;
senator.leyonjelm@aph.gov.au <senator.leyonjelm@aph.gov.au>; senator.lines@aph.gov.au
<senator.lines@aph.gov.au>; senator.marielle.smith@aph.gov.au
<senator.marielle.smith@aph.gov.au>; senator.mcallister@aph.gov.au
<senator.mcallister@aph.gov.au>; senator.mccarthy@aph.gov.au <senator.mccarthy@aph.gov.au>;
senator.mcgrath@aph.gov.au <senator.mcgrath@aph.gov.au>; senator.mckenzie@aph.gov.au
<senator.mckenzie@aph.gov.au>; senator.mclachlan@aph.gov.au <senator.mclachlan@aph.gov.au>;
senator.nampijinpaprice@aph.gov.au <senator.nampijinpaprice@aph.gov.au>;


--- Page 101 ---

senator.nash@aph.gov.au <senator.nash@aph.gov.au>; senator.oneill@aph.gov.au
<senator.oneill@aph.gov.au>; senator.osullivan@aph.gov.au <senator.osullivan@aph.gov.au>;
senator.paterson@aph.gov.au <senator.paterson@aph.gov.au>; senator.patrick@aph.gov.au
<senator.patrick@aph.gov.au>; senator.payman@aph.gov.au <senator.payman@aph.gov.au>;
senator.pratt@aph.gov.au <senator.pratt@aph.gov.au>; senator.rennick@aph.gov.au
<senator.rennick@aph.gov.au>; senator.reynolds@aph.gov.au <senator.reynolds@aph.gov.au>;
senator.rhiannon@aph.gov.au <senator.rhiannon@aph.gov.au>; senator.rice@aph.gov.au
<senator.rice@aph.gov.au>; senator.roberts@aph.gov.au <senator.roberts@aph.gov.au>;
senator.ruston@aph.gov.au <senator.ruston@aph.gov.au>; senator.ryan@aph.gov.au
<senator.ryan@aph.gov.au>; senator.scarr@aph.gov.au <senator.scarr@aph.gov.au>;
senator.seselja@aph.gov.au <senator.seselja@aph.gov.au>; senator.sheldon@aph.gov.au
<senator.sheldon@aph.gov.au>; senator.sterle@aph.gov.au <senator.sterle@aph.gov.au>;
senator.stewart@aph.gov.au <senator.stewart@aph.gov.au>; senator.thorpe@aph.gov.au
<senator.thorpe@aph.gov.au>; senator.tink@aph.gov.au <senator.tink@aph.gov.au>;
senator.urquhart@aph.gov.au <senator.urquhart@aph.gov.au>; senator.van@aph.gov.au
<senator.van@aph.gov.au>; senator.waers@aph.gov.au <senator.waers@aph.gov.au>;
senator.walsh@aph.gov.au <senator.walsh@aph.gov.au>; senator.waters@aph.gov.au
<senator.waters@aph.gov.au>; senator.watt@aph.gov.au <senator.watt@aph.gov.au>;
senator.whish-wilson@aph.gov.au <senator.whish-wilson@aph.gov.au>; senator.wong@aph.gov.au
<senator.wong@aph.gov.au>; SenatorJohnWilliams <senator.williams@aph.gov.au>; Shoebridge,
David (Senator Office) <senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au>; 
<k
>; SMITH David SMITH <senator.david.smith@aph.gov.au>; Steven
Kennedy <steven.kennedy@infrastructure.gov.au>; Canberra Office <Canberra@aec.gov.au>;

<nswecmedia@elections.nsw.gov.au>; 
<kath.gleeson@aec.gov.au>; Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au <Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au>; Michael Lynch
<michael.lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan <thomas.ryan@aec.gov.au>; 
<
glyn.davis@pmc.gov.au <glyn.davis@pmc.gov.au>; 

>; deanna.easton@pmc.gov.au <deanna.easton@pmc.gov.au>;

 nswecmedia@elections.nsw.gov.au
 Kath Gleeson

andrew.walter@pmc.gov.au <andrew.walter@pmc.gov.au>; paul.hupalo@pmc.gov.au
<paul.hupalo@pmc.gov.au>; 
Attorney@ag.gov.au <Attorney@ag.gov.au>
Subject: 2025 Australian Federal elections - for urgent attention - Reply Requested

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government.
Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the
content is safe.

Dear Australian Electoral Commission,

Attached is a letter for your immediate attention and action.
Please note a copy of this email has also gone to the Governor-General

Kind regards
Chamber Committee
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

Disclaimer

s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22


--- Page 102 ---

This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged material. Any review, disclosure,

dissemination, re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance upon this information is prohibited without Chamber Committee

approval in writing. 

If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission including any attachments


--- Page 103 ---

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

Legal Services Mailbox
norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com
Legal Services Mailbox
2025 Australian Federal elections [SEC=OFFICIAL]
Monday, 3 February 2025 5:25:38 PM
Chamber letter #2 to Australian Electoral Commission 29Jan2025.pdf
Response to Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce - Feb 2025.pdf

Dear Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

Please find attached the Acting Electoral Commissioner’s response to your further
correspondence.

Kind regards
Andrew

Chief Legal Officer
Legal Services Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

From: Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce, Inc. <norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com> 
Sent: Tuesday, 28 January 2025 9:11 PM
To: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>; Jeff Pope <jeff.pope@aec.gov.au>;

Cc: a.albanese.mp@aph.gov.au; Aaron.Violi.MP@aph.gov.au;
Adam.Bandt.MP@aph.gov.au; Alicia.Payne.MP@aph.gov.au;
Alison.Byrnes.MP@aph.gov.au; Allegra.Spender.MP@aph.gov.au;
amanda.rishworth.mp@aph.gov.au; Andrew Leigh <andrew.leigh.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Andrew Wilkie <andrew.wilkie.mp@aph.gov.au>; Andrew.Charlton.MP@aph.gov.au;
Andrew.Gee.MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew.Giles.MP@aph.gov.au;
Andrew.Hastie.MP@aph.gov.au; Andrew.Wallace.MP@aph.gov.au;
Andrew.Willcox.MP@aph.gov.au; Angie.Bell.MP@aph.gov.au;
Angus.Taylor.MP@aph.gov.au; Anne.Aly.MP@aph.gov.au; Anne.Stanley.MP@aph.gov.au;
Anne.Webster.MP@aph.gov.au; Barnaby.Joyce.MP@aph.gov.au;
Bert.Vanmanen.MP@aph.gov.au; bill.shorten.mp@aph.gov.au;
Bob.Katter.MP@aph.gov.au; Brendan.OConnor.MP@aph.gov.au;
Brian.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au; Bridget.Archer.MP@aph.gov.au;
carina.garland.MP@aph.gov.au; cassandra.fernando.MP@aph.gov.au;
catherine.king.mp@aph.gov.au; Chris.Bowen.MP@aph.gov.au; Clare O'Neil
<Clare.ONeil.MP@aph.gov.au>; Colin.Boyce.MP@aph.gov.au; Dai.Le.MP@aph.gov.au;
Dan.Repacholi.MP@aph.gov.au; Dan.Tehan.MP@aph.gov.au;
Daniel.Mulino.MP@aph.gov.au; Darren.Chester.MP@aph.gov.au;
David.Coleman.MP@aph.gov.au; David.Gillespie.MP@aph.gov.au;
david.littleproud.mp@aph.gov.au; Elizabeth.Watson-Brown.MP@aph.gov.au;
Emma.McBride.MP@aph.gov.au; Fiona.Phillips.MP@aph.gov.au;

s 22


--- Page 104 ---

Gavin.Pearce.MP@aph.gov.au; Ged.Kearney.MP@aph.gov.au;
Gordon.Reid.MP@aph.gov.au; Graham.Perrett.MP@aph.gov.au; Hamilton, Garth (MP)
<garth.hamilton.mp@aph.gov.au>; Helen.Haines.MP@aph.gov.au;
Henry.Pike.MP@aph.gov.au; Ian Goodenough MP <Ian.Goodenough.MP@aph.gov.au>;
James.Stevens.MP@aph.gov.au; Jason.Clare.MP@aph.gov.au;
Jason.Wood.MP@aph.gov.au; Jenny.Ware.MP@aph.gov.au;
jerome.laxale.MP@aph.gov.au; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au;
Joanne.Ryan.MP@aph.gov.au; Josh.Burns.MP@aph.gov.au; Josh.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au;
Julian.Hill.MP@aph.gov.au; Julie.Collins.MP@aph.gov.au; Justine.Elliot.MP@aph.gov.au;
Karen.Andrews.MP@aph.gov.au; Kate.Chaney.MP@aph.gov.au;
Kate.Thwaites.MP@aph.gov.au; Keith.Pitt.MP@aph.gov.au;
Keith.Wolahan.MP@aph.gov.au; Kevin Hogan <Kevin.Hogan.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Kristy.McBain.MP@aph.gov.au; Kylea.Tink.MP@aph.gov.au; Libby.Coker.MP@aph.gov.au;
Linda.Burney.MP@aph.gov.au; Lisa.Chesters.MP@aph.gov.au;
Llew.O'Brien.MP@aph.gov.au; Louise.Miller-Frost.MP@aph.gov.au;
Luke.Gosling.MP@aph.gov.au; Luke.Howarth.MP@aph.gov.au;
Madeleine.King.MP@aph.gov.au; Maria Vamvakinou
<Maria.Vamvakinou.MP@aph.gov.au>; Marion.Scrymgour.MP@aph.gov.au; Mark Dreyfus
<mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au>; Mark.Butler.MP@aph.gov.au;
Mark.Coulton.MP@aph.gov.au; mary.doyle.mp@aph.gov.au;
Matt.Burnell.MP@aph.gov.au; Matt.Keogh.MP@aph.gov.au;
Matt.Thistlethwaite.MP@aph.gov.au; Max.Chandler-Mather.MP@aph.gov.au;
Melissa.McIntosh.MP@aph.gov.au; Melissa.Price.MP@aph.gov.au;
Meryl.Swanson.MP@aph.gov.au; Michael McCormack MP
<michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au>; Michael.Sukkar.MP@aph.gov.au; Michelle Landry
<Michelle.Landry.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle.Ananda-Rajah.MP@aph.gov.au;
Michelle.Rowland.MP@aph.gov.au; Mike.Freelander.MP@aph.gov.au;
Milton.Dick.MP@aph.gov.au; Nola.Marino.MP@aph.gov.au;
Pat.Conaghan.MP@aph.gov.au; Pat.Conroy.MP@aph.gov.au;
Patrick.Gorman.MP@aph.gov.au; Peta.Murphy.MP@aph.gov.au;
Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au; Peter.Khalil.MP@aph.gov.au;
Phillip.Thompson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rebekha.Sharkie.MP@aph.gov.au; RichardMarlesMP
<Richard.Marles.MP@aph.gov.au>; Rick.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rob Mitchell
<Rob.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ross.Vasta.MP@aph.gov.au;
Rowan.Ramsey.MP@aph.gov.au; Russell.Broadbent.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sally.Sitou.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Birrell.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Lim.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sam.Rae.MP@aph.gov.au; Scott Morrison <scott.morrison.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Scott.Buchholz.MP@aph.gov.au; Sharon.Claydon.MP@aph.gov.au; Shayne Neumann
<shayne.neumann.mp@aph.gov.au>; Smith, David (MP) <david.smith.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Sophie.Scamps.MP@aph.gov.au; Stephen Jones MP <Stephen.Jones.MP@aph.gov.au>;
stephen.bates.MP@aph.gov.au; Steve.Georganas.MP@aph.gov.au;
Susan.Templeman.MP@aph.gov.au; sussan.ley.mp@aph.gov.au;
Tania.Lawrence.MP@aph.gov.au; tanya.plibersek.mp@aph.gov.au;
ted.obrien.mp@aph.gov.au; Terry.Young.MP@aph.gov.au; Tim.Watts.MP@aph.gov.au;


--- Page 105 ---

Tony.Burke.MP@aph.gov.au; Tony.Pasin.MP@aph.gov.au; Tony.Zappia.MP@aph.gov.au;
Tracey.Roberts.MP@aph.gov.au; Warren.Entsch.MP@aph.gov.au;
Zali.Steggall.MP@aph.gov.au; Zaneta.Mascarenhas.MP@aph.gov.au;
Zoe.Daniel.MP@aph.gov.au; zoe.mckenzie.MP@aph.gov.au; Gallagher, Katy (Senator)
<senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au>; Helen Polley <senator.polley@aph.gov.au>; Marise
Payne <senator.payne@aph.gov.au>; McDonald, Susan (Senator)
<senator.mcdonald@aph.gov.au>; Richard Colbeck <senator.colbeck@aph.gov.au>;
senator.allman.payne@aph.gov.au; senator.anning@aph.gov.au;
senator.askew@aph.gov.au; senator.ayres@aph.gov.au; senator.babet@aph.gov.au;
senator.barbara.pocock@aph.gov.au; senator.bilyk@aph.gov.au;
senator.bragg@aph.gov.au; senator.burston@aph.gov.au; senator.bushby@aph.gov.au;
senator.cadell@aph.gov.au; senator.canavan@aph.gov.au; senator.cash@aph.gov.au;
senator.ciccone@aph.gov.au; senator.cox@aph.gov.au; senator.farrell@aph.gov.au;
senator.faruqi@aph.gov.au; senator.fifield@aph.gov.au; senator.gallacher@aph.gov.au;
senator.georgiou@aph.gov.au; senator.gichuhi@aph.gov.au; senator.green@aph.gov.au;
senator.griff@aph.gov.au; senator.grogan@aph.gov.au; senator.haines@aph.gov.au;
senator.hanson-young@aph.gov.au; senator.hanson@aph.gov.au;
senator.henderson@aph.gov.au; Senator.Hinch@aph.gov.au;
senator.hughes@aph.gov.au; senator.hume@aph.gov.au; senator.lambie@aph.gov.au;
senator.leyonjelm@aph.gov.au; senator.lines@aph.gov.au;
senator.marielle.smith@aph.gov.au; senator.mcallister@aph.gov.au;
senator.mccarthy@aph.gov.au; senator.mcgrath@aph.gov.au;
senator.mckenzie@aph.gov.au; senator.mclachlan@aph.gov.au;
senator.nampijinpaprice@aph.gov.au; senator.nash@aph.gov.au;
senator.oneill@aph.gov.au; senator.osullivan@aph.gov.au; senator.paterson@aph.gov.au;
senator.patrick@aph.gov.au; senator.payman@aph.gov.au; senator.pratt@aph.gov.au;
senator.rennick@aph.gov.au; senator.reynolds@aph.gov.au;
senator.rhiannon@aph.gov.au; senator.rice@aph.gov.au; senator.roberts@aph.gov.au;
senator.ruston@aph.gov.au; senator.ryan@aph.gov.au; senator.scarr@aph.gov.au;
senator.seselja@aph.gov.au; senator.sheldon@aph.gov.au; senator.sterle@aph.gov.au;
senator.stewart@aph.gov.au; senator.thorpe@aph.gov.au; senator.tink@aph.gov.au;
senator.urquhart@aph.gov.au; senator.van@aph.gov.au; senator.waers@aph.gov.au;
senator.walsh@aph.gov.au; senator.waters@aph.gov.au; senator.watt@aph.gov.au;
senator.whish-wilson@aph.gov.au; senator.wong@aph.gov.au; SenatorJohnWilliams
<senator.williams@aph.gov.au>; Shoebridge, David (Senator Office)
<senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au>
Subject: Re: 2025 Australian Federal elections [SEC=OFFICIAL]

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal
Government. Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the
sender and know the content is safe.

Dear Australian Electoral Commission,

Attached is a second letter for your immediate attention and action.


--- Page 106 ---

Kind regards
Chamber Committee
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

ii

isclai
This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged
material. Any review, disclosure, dissemination, re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance
upon this information is prohibited without Chamber Committee approval in writing.

If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission

including any attachments

On Mon, 20 Jan 2025 at 18:03, Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>
wrote:

Dear Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

Attached please find the AEC’s response to your letter to the Acting Electoral
Commissioner.

Kind regards

Andrew Johnson

Chief Legal Officer

Legal Services Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

 

From: Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce, Inc. <norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com>
Sent: Wednesday, 15 January 2025 8:27 PM

To: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>; Jeff Pope <jeff.p0pe@aec.gov.au>;
Brendan Ryan <brendan.ryan@aec.gov.au>

Cc: a.albanese.mp@aph.gov.au; Aaron. Violi. MP@aph.gov.au;

Adam.Bandt.MP @aph.gov.au; Alicia. Payne. MP@aph.gov.au;

Alison.Byrnes. MP@aph.gov.au; Allegra. Spender. MP @aph.gov.au;
amanda.rishworth.mp@aph.gov.au; Andrew Leigh <andrew_leigh.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Andrew Wilkie <andrew.wilkie.mp@aph.gov.au>; Andrew.Charlton. MP@aph.gov.au;
Andrew.Gee.MP @aph.gov.au; Andrew.Giles. MP @aph.gov.au;
Andrew.Hastie. MP @aph.gov.au; Andrew.Wallace.MP@aph.gov.au;

Andrew. Willcox.MP@aph.gov.au; Angie.Bell MP@aph.gov.au;


--- Page 107 ---

Angus.Taylor.MP@aph.gov.au; Anne.Aly.MP@aph.gov.au;
Anne.Stanley.MP@aph.gov.au; Anne.Webster.MP@aph.gov.au;
Barnaby.Joyce.MP@aph.gov.au; Bert.Vanmanen.MP@aph.gov.au;
bill.shorten.mp@aph.gov.au; Bob.Katter.MP@aph.gov.au;
Brendan.OConnor.MP@aph.gov.au; Brian.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au;
Bridget.Archer.MP@aph.gov.au; carina.garland.MP@aph.gov.au;
cassandra.fernando.MP@aph.gov.au; catherine.king.mp@aph.gov.au;
Chris.Bowen.MP@aph.gov.au; Clare O'Neil <Clare.ONeil.MP@aph.gov.au>;
Colin.Boyce.MP@aph.gov.au; Dai.Le.MP@aph.gov.au; Dan.Repacholi.MP@aph.gov.au;
Dan.Tehan.MP@aph.gov.au; Daniel.Mulino.MP@aph.gov.au;
Darren.Chester.MP@aph.gov.au; David.Coleman.MP@aph.gov.au;
David.Gillespie.MP@aph.gov.au; david.littleproud.mp@aph.gov.au; Elizabeth.Watson-
Brown.MP@aph.gov.au; Emma.McBride.MP@aph.gov.au;
Fiona.Phillips.MP@aph.gov.au; Gavin.Pearce.MP@aph.gov.au;
Ged.Kearney.MP@aph.gov.au; Gordon.Reid.MP@aph.gov.au;
Graham.Perrett.MP@aph.gov.au; Hamilton, Garth (MP)
<garth.hamilton.mp@aph.gov.au>; Helen.Haines.MP@aph.gov.au;
Henry.Pike.MP@aph.gov.au; Ian Goodenough MP <Ian.Goodenough.MP@aph.gov.au>;
James.Stevens.MP@aph.gov.au; Jason.Clare.MP@aph.gov.au;
Jason.Wood.MP@aph.gov.au; Jenny.Ware.MP@aph.gov.au;
jerome.laxale.MP@aph.gov.au; Jim.Chalmers.MP@aph.gov.au;
Joanne.Ryan.MP@aph.gov.au; Josh.Burns.MP@aph.gov.au;
Josh.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au; Julian.Hill.MP@aph.gov.au; Julie.Collins.MP@aph.gov.au;
Justine.Elliot.MP@aph.gov.au; Karen.Andrews.MP@aph.gov.au;
Kate.Chaney.MP@aph.gov.au; Kate.Thwaites.MP@aph.gov.au;
Keith.Pitt.MP@aph.gov.au; Keith.Wolahan.MP@aph.gov.au; Kevin Hogan
<Kevin.Hogan.MP@aph.gov.au>; Kristy.McBain.MP@aph.gov.au;
Kylea.Tink.MP@aph.gov.au; Libby.Coker.MP@aph.gov.au;
Linda.Burney.MP@aph.gov.au; Lisa.Chesters.MP@aph.gov.au;
Llew.O'Brien.MP@aph.gov.au; Louise.Miller-Frost.MP@aph.gov.au;
Luke.Gosling.MP@aph.gov.au; Luke.Howarth.MP@aph.gov.au;
Madeleine.King.MP@aph.gov.au; Maria Vamvakinou
<Maria.Vamvakinou.MP@aph.gov.au>; Marion.Scrymgour.MP@aph.gov.au; Mark
Dreyfus <mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au>; Mark.Butler.MP@aph.gov.au;
Mark.Coulton.MP@aph.gov.au; mary.doyle.mp@aph.gov.au;
Matt.Burnell.MP@aph.gov.au; Matt.Keogh.MP@aph.gov.au;
Matt.Thistlethwaite.MP@aph.gov.au; Max.Chandler-Mather.MP@aph.gov.au;
Melissa.McIntosh.MP@aph.gov.au; Melissa.Price.MP@aph.gov.au;
Meryl.Swanson.MP@aph.gov.au; Michael McCormack MP
<michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au>; Michael.Sukkar.MP@aph.gov.au; Michelle
Landry <Michelle.Landry.MP@aph.gov.au>; Michelle.Ananda-Rajah.MP@aph.gov.au;
Michelle.Rowland.MP@aph.gov.au; Mike.Freelander.MP@aph.gov.au;
Milton.Dick.MP@aph.gov.au; Nola.Marino.MP@aph.gov.au;
Pat.Conaghan.MP@aph.gov.au; Pat.Conroy.MP@aph.gov.au;


--- Page 108 ---

Patrick.Gorman.MP@aph.gov.au; Peta.Murphy.MP@aph.gov.au;
Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au; Peter.Khalil.MP@aph.gov.au;
Phillip.Thompson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rebekha.Sharkie.MP@aph.gov.au; RichardMarlesMP
<Richard.Marles.MP@aph.gov.au>; Rick.Wilson.MP@aph.gov.au; Rob Mitchell
<Rob.Mitchell.MP@aph.gov.au>; Ross.Vasta.MP@aph.gov.au;
Rowan.Ramsey.MP@aph.gov.au; Russell.Broadbent.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sally.Sitou.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Birrell.MP@aph.gov.au; Sam.Lim.MP@aph.gov.au;
Sam.Rae.MP@aph.gov.au; Scott Morrison <scott.morrison.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Scott.Buchholz.MP@aph.gov.au; Sharon.Claydon.MP@aph.gov.au; Shayne Neumann
<shayne.neumann.mp@aph.gov.au>; Smith, David (MP) <david.smith.mp@aph.gov.au>;
Sophie.Scamps.MP@aph.gov.au; Stephen Jones MP <Stephen.Jones.MP@aph.gov.au>;
stephen.bates.MP@aph.gov.au; Steve.Georganas.MP@aph.gov.au;
Susan.Templeman.MP@aph.gov.au; sussan.ley.mp@aph.gov.au;
Tania.Lawrence.MP@aph.gov.au; tanya.plibersek.mp@aph.gov.au;
ted.obrien.mp@aph.gov.au; Terry.Young.MP@aph.gov.au; Tim.Watts.MP@aph.gov.au;
Tony.Burke.MP@aph.gov.au; Tony.Pasin.MP@aph.gov.au;
Tony.Zappia.MP@aph.gov.au; Tracey.Roberts.MP@aph.gov.au;
Warren.Entsch.MP@aph.gov.au; Zali.Steggall.MP@aph.gov.au;
Zaneta.Mascarenhas.MP@aph.gov.au; Zoe.Daniel.MP@aph.gov.au;
zoe.mckenzie.MP@aph.gov.au; Gallagher, Katy (Senator)
<senator.katy.gallagher@aph.gov.au>; Helen Polley <senator.polley@aph.gov.au>;
Marise Payne <senator.payne@aph.gov.au>; McDonald, Susan (Senator)
<senator.mcdonald@aph.gov.au>; Richard Colbeck <senator.colbeck@aph.gov.au>;
senator.abetz@aph.gov.au; senator.allman.payne@aph.gov.au;
senator.anning@aph.gov.au; senator.antic@aph.gov.au; senator.askew@aph.gov.au;
senator.ayres@aph.gov.au; senator.babet@aph.gov.au;
senator.barbara.pocock@aph.gov.au; senator.bilyk@aph.gov.au;
senator.bragg@aph.gov.au; senator.burston@aph.gov.au; senator.bushby@aph.gov.au;
senator.cadell@aph.gov.au; senator.canavan@aph.gov.au; senator.cash@aph.gov.au;
senator.ciccone@aph.gov.au; senator.cox@aph.gov.au; senator.farrell@aph.gov.au;
senator.faruqi@aph.gov.au; senator.fifield@aph.gov.au; senator.gallacher@aph.gov.au;
senator.georgiou@aph.gov.au; senator.gichuhi@aph.gov.au;
senator.green@aph.gov.au; senator.griff@aph.gov.au; senator.grogan@aph.gov.au;
senator.haines@aph.gov.au; senator.hanson-young@aph.gov.au;
senator.hanson@aph.gov.au; senator.henderson@aph.gov.au;
Senator.Hinch@aph.gov.au; senator.hughes@aph.gov.au; senator.hume@aph.gov.au;
senator.lambie@aph.gov.au; senator.leyonjelm@aph.gov.au; senator.lines@aph.gov.au;
senator.marielle.smith@aph.gov.au; senator.mcallister@aph.gov.au;
senator.mccarthy@aph.gov.au; senator.mcgrath@aph.gov.au;
senator.mckenzie@aph.gov.au; senator.mclachlan@aph.gov.au;
senator.nampijinpaprice@aph.gov.au; senator.nash@aph.gov.au;
senator.oneill@aph.gov.au; senator.osullivan@aph.gov.au;
senator.paterson@aph.gov.au; senator.patrick@aph.gov.au;
senator.payman@aph.gov.au; senator.pratt@aph.gov.au; senator.rennick@aph.gov.au;


--- Page 109 ---

senator.reynolds@aph.gov.au; senator.rhiannon@aph.gov.au;
senator.rice@aph.gov.au; senator.roberts@aph.gov.au; senator.ruston@aph.gov.au;
senator.ryan@aph.gov.au; senator.scarr@aph.gov.au; senator.seselja@aph.gov.au;
senator.sheldon@aph.gov.au; senator.sterle@aph.gov.au; senator.stewart@aph.gov.au;
senator.thorpe@aph.gov.au; senator.tink@aph.gov.au; senator.urquhart@aph.gov.au;
senator.van@aph.gov.au; senator.waers@aph.gov.au; senator.walsh@aph.gov.au;
senator.waters@aph.gov.au; senator.watt@aph.gov.au; senator.whish-
wilson@aph.gov.au; senator.wong@aph.gov.au; SenatorJohnWilliams
<senator.williams@aph.gov.au>; Shoebridge, David (Senator Office)
<senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au>; 
<
Steven Kennedy <steven.kennedy@infrastructure.gov.au>; Canberra Office
<Canberra@aec.gov.au>; 
nswecmedia@elections.nsw.gov.au; 
Gleeson <kath.gleeson@aec.gov.au>; Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au; Michael Lynch
<michael.lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan <thomas.ryan@aec.gov.au>; 
<

>; SMITH David SMITH <senator.david.smith@aph.gov.au>;

>; deanna.easton@pmc.gov.au; glyn.davis@pmc.gov.au;

>; Kath

 <

;

paul.hupalo@pmc.gov.au; 
Subject: 2025 Australian Federal elections - for urgent attention - Reply Requested

; andrew.walter@pmc.gov.au;
; Attorney@ag.gov.au

; 

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal
Government. Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the
sender and know the content is safe.

Dear Australian Electoral Commission,

Attached is a letter for your immediate attention and action.
Please note a copy of this email has also gone to the Governor-General

Kind regards
Chamber Committee
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

Disclaimer

This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged material. Any review,

disclosure, dissemination, re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance upon this information is prohibited without

Chamber Committee approval in writing. 

If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission including any attachments

DISCLAIMER:

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return
email and delete all copies.  If this email or any attachments have been sent to you in

s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22


--- Page 110 ---

error, that error does not constitute waiver of any confidentiality, privilege or copyright
in respect of information in the email or attachments.


--- Page 111 ---

Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce  

For immediate attention 

Mr Jeff Pope 
Acting Electoral Commissioner 
Australian Electoral Commission 
Australia 

Attention:  Mr Andrew Johnson, Chief Legal Officer 

Australian Elections 2025 

Dear Acting Commissioner, 

29th January 2025 

The Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce refers to a letter, from Mr. Andrew 
Johnson, Chief Legal Officer with Australian Electoral Commission reference LEX6969 
dated 20 January 2025:  copy attached.  With all due respect to Mr. Johnson the 
Australian Electoral Commission is acting illegally and unlawfully in relation to 
including indigenous Norfolk Islanders who live on Norfolk Island in the Australian 
Electoral role. 

In reference to your paragraph -    “As the AEC has previously advised the Norfolk 
Island Chamber of Commerce, the matters you raise are matters for the 
Commonwealth Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, 
Communications and the Arts (responsible for territories and Norfolk Island), the 
Attorney-General’s Department (responsible for Constitutional matters) and the 
Department of Home Affairs (responsible for citizenship).” This is incorrect, it is a 
matter for all departments, agents of the Australian Government, and  including all 
politicians of the Australian Parliament. 

Your letter states:  “The High Court held in Berwick Ltd v Gray [1976] HCA 12 that 
Norfolk Island forms part of the Commonwealth. In 2007, the High Court further 
dismissed a challenge by Norfolk Islanders in Bennett v Commonwealth [2007] HCA 18 
regarding the validity of Commonwealth legislation requiring persons to vote in 
Norfolk Island elections. Granting electoral rights on the basis of Australian citizenship 

Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce,   Norfolk Island                     Email:   norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com


--- Page 112 ---

to Norfolk Islanders was held as a valid exercise of Parliament’s power to make laws 
“for the government of any territory” under section 122 of the Constitution.”   

The Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce provides the following answer to that 
statement: - 

Over the years various court cases have mentioned the legal status of Norfolk 
Island, but they have been found to be limited in declaration of the status or 
situation for Norfolk Island to the facts of the case or law being dealt with. 
Bennett v the Commonwealth 2007 was an Australian federal electoral voting 
power case 
For years Commonwealth of Australian government officials have referred to 
the Berwick Ltd v Gray – that Norfolk Island was a part of Australia thereby the 
Australian Government official position that Norfolk Island “belongs” to 
Australia. That is misinformation. 
Berwick has since been declared limited to the question of whether – Norfolk 
Island can be subject to Australian taxation laws and no more. 
Indeed, in part of paragraph [177] of the High Court of Australia judgement 
Bennett v the Commonwealth case, Justice Callinan (as His Honour then was) 
and which does not seem to have been disagreed with by other High Court 
judges in the Bennett v The Commonwealth case: -  

“On acceptance by Australia, Norfolk Island was a Crown possession or 
dependency which had been established as a distinct and separate 
settlement for occupation by Pitcairners and their descendants, and others 
admitted to their community.  Norfolk Island did not on its acceptance by 
Australia, nor has it since, become part of Australia, geographically or 
politically.  Statements to the contrary in Berwick Ltd v Gray [198] are 
wrong.  Its community is not and has never been part of the Australian 
community.  Australian citizenship has never been a determining factor in 
identifying the community of the island.” 
In the Bennett case High Court Australian Justices had reservations about 
any attempt by the Commonwealth of Australia and others to rely on 
Berwick Ltd v Gray as the main reason for any claim by the Commonwealth 
of Australia that Norfolk Island was a part of that country for all reasons 
rather than just for Australian Government taxation. 

Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce,   Norfolk Island                     Email:   norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com


--- Page 113 ---

Reference Commonwealth of Australia Constitution and Section 122.  This is 
completely irrelevant in relation to Norfolk Island.  There was no Imperial legislation 
(as evidence shows In British documents) in 1913 to allow for Norfolk Island to be 
“PLACED” for then the Commonwealth Government to “ACCEPTED”.  Separate to that 
there are also other legal and lawful reasons why Norfolk Island is not part of and 
cannot be administered by the Commonwealth of Australia. 

The Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce now requests the Australian Electoral 
Commission to rectify this unlawful and illegal matter forthwith. 

Sincerely, 

Cherri Buffett 
President  
for 
NNorfolk Island Chamber of Commerce Committee 
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce 

_Disclaimer_ 
This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged 
material. Any review, disclosure, dissemination, re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance upon this 
information is prohibited without Chamber Committee approval in writing.  
If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission including any 
attachments 

Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce,   Norfolk Island                     Email:   norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com


--- Page 114 ---

Cc) Australian Electoral Commission

Electoral Commissioner

LEX6969

Cherri Buffett
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

By email: norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com

Dear Ms Buffett
Correspondence from Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

| refer to your letter to the Australian Electoral Commissioner of 29 January 2025 regarding the legal
status of Norfolk Island.

As you have been advised, the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) is a statutory authority that is
required to administer federal election events in accordance with the Commonwealth Electoral Act
1918. This Act requires Australian citizens residing in Norfolk Island who are over the age of 18 to be
enrolled and vote in federal elections. Failure to enrol or vote may lead to an administrative penalty or
prosecution in court.

Your correspondence raised concerns regarding the High Court decisions Berwick Lid v Gray [1976]
HCA 12 and Bennett v Commonwealth [2007] HCA 18 (‘Bennett’), by referring to a paragraph of
Justice Callinan’s judgment in Bennett set out the plaintiffs submissions in that case. If you read that
decision, you will see that Justice Callinan rejected the plaintiffs submissions (see paragraph 178 of
Bennett) and agreed with the other members of the High Court that Commonwealth laws can apply to
Norfolk Island.

The Australian Electoral Commission does not intend to engage in any further correspondence on
this matter with the Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce. Should you wish to pursue any other
concerns on the administration of Norfolk Island, | encourage you to direct these matters to the
responsible Commonwealth department as outlined in the Administrative Arrangements Order.

| look forward to the full participation of all eligible citizens residing on Norfolk Island in the 2025
federal election.

Section 47F

   

Jeff Pope
Acting Electoral Commissioner
3 February 2025

10-12 Mort Street, Canberra ACT 2600 P02 6271 4411 WWW.aeC.govV.au


--- Page 115 ---

From:
To:
Bcc:
Subject:
Date:

Legal Services Mailbox
norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com
; 

; Andrew Johnson

RE: Australian Government Federal elections - reply requested (LEX7954) [SEC=OFFICIAL]
Thursday, 17 April 2025 4:41:23 PM

Dear Chamber Committee

The Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) is a statutory authority that is required to administer
federal election events in accordance with the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918. The AEC does not
hold any documents you have requested.

We recommend you direct your request to the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional
Development, Communications and the Arts as the relevant department with responsibility for
managing Australia’s external territories. This is outlined in the current Administrative Arrangements
Order.

Alternatively, we refer you to the Norfolk Island Act 1913.

Kind regards
Australian Electoral Commission

From: Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce, Inc. <norfolkisland.coc@gmail.com> 
Sent: Monday, 14 April 2025 3:26 AM
To: Legal Services Mailbox <Legal@aec.gov.au>; Robyn.Black@aec.gov.au; 
<
Tom.Rogers@aec.gov.au; geoff.pope@aec.gov.au; Michael Lynch
<michael.lynch@aec.gov.au>; Thomas Ryan <thomas.ryan@aec.gov.au>; 
<

>; Kath Gleeson <kath.gleeson@aec.gov.au>;

>; glyn.davis@pmc.gov.au; 

; 

Attorney@ag.gov.au; (Shared)

FOI & IPS Mailbox <FOI.IPS@gg.gov.au>
Cc: Shoebridge, David (Senator Office) <senator.shoebridge@aph.gov.au>;
senator.wong@aph.gov.au; senator.hanson@aph.gov.au; Mark Dreyfus
<mark.dreyfus.mp@aph.gov.au>; Peter.Dutton.MP@aph.gov.au
Subject: Australian Government Federal elections - reply requested

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal
Government. Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognise the
sender and know the content is safe.

Dear all,

Members of the Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce (Chamber) have
requested the Chamber bring to your attention the two documents
enclosed.  Chamber members have requested certified copy all the legal
and lawful documents which state:

s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22s 22Section 22Section 22


--- Page 116 ---

1) That Norfolk Island was annexed to the State of New South Wales

2) The results of the New South Wales referendum document which
states that the people of the State of New South Wales agreed for
Norfolk Island to be annexed to that State, as per the State of New
South Wales Constitution.

3) That Norfolk Island was then annexed and handed over from the
State of New South Wales to the Commonwealth of Australia.

4) The transfer document: the Imperial Legislation as required by law
from the United Kingdom to facilitate Norfolk Island becoming part of
the Commonwealth of Australia (even as a territory).

These documents are required to provide Chamber members the truth
so that there is no doubt whatsoever indigenous Norfolk Islanders are
"Australian citizens" as per law, including Australian law and thereby
international law.

Members of the Chamber have requested you all do not provide quotes
of Section 122 and the Order in Council 1914 - as these are not the
legal or lawful documents in answer to the above questions.

Members have also requested the Chamber to state that they do not
want to hear about Australia court cases which refer to Norfolk Island
being part of Australia - these are not the legal or lawful documents as
requested.

All these documents requested will allow the indigenous Norfolk
Island the truth, to know if they are legally and lawfully bound
to vote in the 2025 Australian Federal elections.

Please provide these documents by close of business Friday,
18th April 2025.

Thank you for your assistance.
Kind regards

Chamber Committee
Norfolk Island Chamber of Commerce

a

Disclaimer

 

This message and the information therein is for the recipient only and may contain confidential and/or legally privileged
material. Any review, disclosure, dissemination, re-transmission, copying or other use of, or taking any action in reliance
upon this information is prohibited without Chamber Committee approval in writing.

If you have received this email in error, please notify Chamber and delete all communication of this transmission

including any attachments


--- Page 117 ---

