

--- Page 1 ---

From: Andrew Johnson  
Sent: Thursday, 30 August 2018 10:18 AM 
To: Emily Foat <emilyfoat@twitter.com>; Kara Hinesley <khinesley@twitter.com> 
Cc: Tim Courtney <tim.courtney@aec.gov.au>; Evan Ekin-Smyth <evan.ekin-smyth@aec.gov.au>; 
Carla Ward <Carla.Ward@aec.gov.au>; Paul Pirani <paul.pirani@aec.gov.au> 
Subject: AEC follow up - scenarios regarding compliance with the Commonwealth Electoral Act 
[SEC=UNCLASSIFIED] 

Good Morning Emily and Kara 

It was good to meet you in Sydney last week.  At the meeting I said I would provide some 
scenarios on how we can manage electoral communications on Twitter that do not comply 
with the authorisation requirements in the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (Electoral 
Act).  The closer the electoral communication is to a Federal election the more urgent it will 
be to either obtain prompt compliance with the Electoral Act or to block or remove the 
non-compliant communication.  To this end the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) is 
keen to agree on the process with Twitter for escalating and resolving any such matters.   

I have set out below three scenarios.  The first two scenarios are the most likely occur, the 
third scenario will only arise if the AEC is concerned that a communication may breach more 
serious electoral offences in Part XXI of the Electoral Act.  For each scenario I have outlined 
the actions the AEC will take, when we will contact you and the assistance we will require 
from Twitter.  For completeness I have included a summary of the authorisation 
requirements in the Electoral Act.   

Given the increasing use of social media by political participants, we are interested in your 
views on the processes suggested below for escalating and resolving any Electoral Act 
compliance issues that may arise with electoral communications on social media. 

Kind regards 

Andrew Johnson | Principal Government Lawyer 
Electoral Authorisation Section | Legal & Procurement Branch 
Australian Electoral Commission 
T: (02) 6271 4759 | M: 

7LS7344 Released Document No 4Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 2 ---

Authorisation of electoral communications on 
social media scenarios 

1.  Paid electoral advertisement on Twitter without proper authorisation 

Issue:  Paid electoral advertisements require an authorisation to allow voters to know who is 

communicating the advertisement. 

Actions: 

Event 
Unauthorised electoral ad on 
Twitter  

Entity 
AEC 

Inadequate response from 
person or entity responsible 
for the electoral ad 
AEC notifies Twitter of the 
unauthorised electoral ad 

AEC 

Twitter 

Action 
Contact or attempt to contact the person or entity 
responsible for the electoral ad to advise of the legal 
requirements in the Electoral Act and ask them to 
rectify or remove the ad. 
Notify Twitter of an unauthorised electoral ad on 
social media site. 

Remove or block the electoral ad, or contact the 
person or entity responsible for the ad and advise 
them to add an authorisation or have the ad 
removed or blocked. 

2.  Anonymous communication on Twitter containing electoral matter 

Issue:  AEC unable to determine whether an anonymous communication is electoral matter that 

requires an authorisation under the Electoral Act. 

Actions: 

Event 
Anonymous communication 
containing electoral matter on 
Twitter 

Entity 
AEC 

Inadequate response from 
person or entity responsible for 
the anonymous electoral 
communication 
AEC notifies Twitter of the 
electoral communication and the 
need to settle whether the 
responsible person or entity is a 
disclosure entity 
Confirm the person or entity 
responsible for the electoral 
communication is: * 
  not a disclosure entity  

AEC 

Twitter 

Twitter 

Action 
Contact or attempt to contact the person or 
entity responsible for the electoral 
communication to ascertain whether they are a 
disclosure entity and advise of the legal 
requirements for disclosure entities to authorise 
electoral communications. 
Notify Twitter of an anonymous communication 
containing electoral matter and the need to 
ascertain whether the responsible person or 
entity is a disclosure entity. 
Contact the person or entity responsible for the 
electoral communication to advise of the 
authorisation requirements in the Electoral Act.   

  Advise the AEC. No further action. 

LS7344 Released Document No 4Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 3 ---

  a disclosure entity  

  Advise the AEC. Remove or block the 

communication if the responsible person 
or entity does not take action to add an 
authorisation in compliance with the 
Electoral Act. 

*   If Twitter is able to confirm whether a person or entity is a disclosure entity, this will 
avoid the need to share personal or commercial information with the AEC.  AEC can 
provide advice on the categories of a persons or entities that are disclosure entities for 
the purposes of the Electoral Act.   

3.  Paid electoral advertisement on Twitter that infringes other offences in 

the Electoral Act  

Issue:  In addition to the issues raised above, the AEC may need further details on the person or 
entity responsible for an electoral communication to consider other civil or criminal action 
under the Electoral Act.  For example it is an offence under section 329 of the Electoral Act to 
publish or distribute or cause to be published or distributed any electoral communication that 
is likely to mislead or deceive an elector in relation to the casting of a vote. 

Actions:  In addition to the actions outlined above: 

Event 
Incomplete information on the 
person or entity responsible for 
an electoral communication on 
social media 
Request from the AEC for 
information 

Entity 
AEC 

Action 
Seek information from Twitter about the person 
or entity responsible for the communication. 

Twitter 

Provide the AEC the requested information. 

In any of the above scenarios, if Twitter is unable to remove or block a communication that does not 
comply with the Electoral Act or cannot provide information about the person or entity responsible 
for the communication, then the AEC (or a candidate in an election) may get an injunction under 
section 383 of the Electoral Act against the person or entity responsible for the communication 
and/or Twitter. 

Background 
The Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (Electoral Act) is concerned that voters know who is 
communicating an electoral matter to them (electoral communication).  The Electoral Act does not 
regulate truth in electoral communications.  Part XXA of the Electoral Act requires electoral 
communications to have an authorisation to inform voters who is responsible for the 
communication. 

For a social media communication to be an electoral communication requiring an authorisation 
under section 321D of the Electoral Act, the communication must: 

 

contain electoral matter, and 

  be at least one of the following: 

o  a paid electoral advertisement, 

LS7344 Released Document No 4Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 4 ---

o  a matter communicated by, on behalf of, a disclosure entity. 

‘Electoral matter’ is defined in section 4(1) of the Electoral Act as ‘matter which is intended or likely 
to affect voting in an election’. For the purpose of the authorisation requirements in Part XXA of the 
Electoral Act, paragraph 4(9)(b) clarifies that there must be a sufficient connection between the 
subject matters of federal elections:  

(9)   Without limiting the definition of electoral matter in subsection (1), matter is taken to be 

intended or likely to affect voting in an election if: 

(b)    … in Part XXA—it contains an express or implicit reference to: 

(i)    the election; or 

(ii)   a political party, a branch or division of a political party or a candidate or group 

of candidates in the election; or 

(iii)  an issue submitted to, or otherwise before, the electors in connection with the 

election. 

‘Disclosure entity’ is defined in section 321B of the Electoral Act to be a political party, associated 
entity, member of the House of Representatives, Senator, a candidate or group of candidates in a 
federal election or other persons or entities who engage in the electoral process and are required by 
the Electoral Act to provide a return. 

From: Evan Ekin-Smyth  
Sent: Thursday, 23 August 2018 10:54 AM 
To: Emily Foat <emilyfoat@twitter.com>; Kara Hinesley <khinesley@twitter.com> 
Cc: Tim Courtney <Tim.Courtney@aec.gov.au>; Andrew Johnson <Andrew.Johnson@aec.gov.au> 
Subject: RE: Twitter Follow-up [DLM=For-Official-Use-Only] 

Thanks Kara and Emily – it was certainly good to meet you both and talk through election 
scenarios.  

Kara, I imagine Andrew will send through a specific scenario just to bed in what we were 
talking about. Emily, someone from our communication section will be in touch (either myself 
or a colleague). 

Cheers 
Evan 

Evan Ekin-Smyth | Assistant Director  
Media - Australian Electoral Commission 
T: (02) 6271 4419 X: 21085 M: 
www.aec.gov.au/media   

7LS7344 Released Document No 4Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 5 ---

From: Emily Foat [mailto:emilyfoat@twitter.com]  
Sent: Wednesday, 22 August 2018 2:54 PM 
To: Kara Hinesley <khinesley@twitter.com> 
Cc: Evan Ekin-Smyth <Evan.Ekin-Smyth@aec.gov.au>; Tim Courtney <Tim.Courtney@aec.gov.au>; 
Andrew Johnson <Andrew.Johnson@aec.gov.au> 
Subject: Re: Twitter Follow-up 

Hi Tim, Evan, and Andrew, 

Thanks for the introduction Kara, great meeting you all yesterday,  
As mentioned in our meeting I'm happy to fly to Canberra to facilitate a Twitter media 
workshop to update you on Twitter's media solutions and showcase the best way to utilise the 
platform from a campaign perspective.  

Please let me know if this would be helpful and we can start looking at some available dates?  

Many Thanks, 
Emily  

Emily Foat 
Twitter Australia 
@emilyfoat 
e: emilyfoat@twitter.com 
m: 

On Wed, Aug 22, 2018 at 10:06 AM, Kara Hinesley <khinesley@twitter.com> wrote: 
Hi Tim, Evan, and Andrew, 

Thank you again for coming by our offices yesterday to meet with myself and Emily.  

As discussed, we're looking forward to working with the AEC and appreciate your efforts in 
helping us ensure that we're developing detailed and efficient ways to handle any issues that 
might arise during future campaigns and elections.  

As promised, I also wanted to send through contact details for myself and Emily: 

  Kara Hinesley: 
  Emily Foat: 

; khinesley@twitter.com; @karahinesley   

; emilyfoat@twitter.com; @EmilyFoat    

777LS7344 Released Document No 4Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 6 ---

Please don't hesitate to let us know if you have any questions, and we look forward to being 
in touch in the future. 

Warm regards, 

Kara 
--  

 @karahinesley | Head of Public Policy, Government, and Philanthropy, Australia & 

NZ | Twitter Inc. 

LS7344 Released Document No 4Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982