

--- Page 1 ---

CJAEC 

Australian  Electoral  Commission 

• 

Our Reference:  18 19 014,  18/829 

Mr Darren Churchill 
Registered Officer 
Australian Democrats 
P.O.  Box 547 
GLENELG SA 5045 

Dear Mr Churchill 

Approval  of application for  party registration 

I  refer to the application lodged on 5 December 2018 to register the Australian Democrats 
(the  Party) as a political party under Part XI of the  Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 
(the Electoral Act). 

As a delegate of the Electoral Commission I  have approved the application to register the Party. 
The Party's details have been entered in the Register of Political Parties (the Register). 
Enclosed is a report of the details held in respect to your  Party's registration.  Please contact the 
Australian Electoral Commission  (AEC) if those details are inaccurate. 

The  Party's details will be included in an amended publication of the  Register available on the 
AEC website within seven days. The AEC will also publish on its website a notice of this 
decision and a Statement of Reasons. 

The decision of the delegate to approve the Party's registration is a reviewable decision. 
A person (including an organisation) affected by the decision and dissatisfied with it,  may make 
a written application to the Electoral Commission requesting a review of the decision within 
28 days of the decision coming to the attention of the affected person. Commissioners of the 
Electoral Commission are the Electoral Commissioner,  a judicial and a non-judicial member. 
Any person affected by and dissatisfied with the outcome of the review by the Electoral 
Commission may request further review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in accordance 
with the Administrative Appeals  Tribunal Act 1975. 

Registration confers a number of entitlements and obligations on political parties.  The 
information below provides a brief description of those entitlements and obligations.  I urge you 
to read this information carefully to ensure that you are familiar with the entitlements and 
obligations applying to your Party. 

Office  holders 

In order to access the entitlements of registration, political parties must provide details of 
particular party office holders to the AEC.  The same person can  hold a number of positions at 
the same time. 

Registered Officer and Deputy Registered Officer 

The  Registered Officer and  Deputy Registered Officers of a party can nominate the party's 
endorsed candidates for a federal election. 

50 Marcus Clarke Street 
Canberra ACT 2600 

Locked Bag 4007 
Canberra ACT 2601 

Email fad@aec.gov.au 
Tel 02 6271  4552 

www.aec.gov.au 
ABN 21  133 285 851 
Fax 02 6293 7655 

LS7540 Released Document No. 36Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 2 ---

LS7540 Released Document No. 36Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 3 ---

LS7540 Released Document No. 36Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 4 ---

LS7540 Released Document No. 36Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 5 ---

Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 6 ---

REDACTION CODES 

Personal Information (name) redacted. 

Personal Information (date of birth) redacted. 

Personal Information (photograph) redacted 

Personal Information (facsimile of signature) redacted. 

Personal Information (facsimile of manuscript initialling) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individual’s address) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s telephone number) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s opinion) redacted. 

Personal Information (opinion about individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (employment history) redacted. 

Personal Information (qualifications) redacted. 

Personal Information (health) redacted. 

Personal Information (identifying individual) redacted. 

Business information (Bank Account details) redacted. 

Business information (Billing Account details) redacted. 

Business information (internal operations) redacted. 

Legal Professional Communication redacted. 

Deliberative material redacted. 

Irrelevant material redacted. 

Electoral Roll material redacted. 

Tests, examinations or audits material redacted. 

Management or assessment of personnel material redacted. 

Proper and efficient conduct of the operations of AEC material redacted. 

Lawful methods or procedures for preventing, detecting, investigating, or 
dealing with matters arising out of, breaches or evasions of the law. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

Freedom of Information Release