

--- Page 1 ---

Our ref: AEC7419 

7​th​ April 2019 

Attn: Joanne Reid 
A/g Assistant Commissioner 
Disclosure, Assurance and Engagement 
Australian Electoral Commission 
BY EMAIL ONLY TO:  fad@aec.gov.au 

Dear Assistant Commissioner 

APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS AS A POLITICAL 
PARTY 

The Australian Democrats lodged an application for registration as a political party on the 3rd
December 2018. At that time, we anticipated a May election and believed we had ample time for the
registration to be completed based on the timeframes published by the AEC in the Party Registration
Guide. 

We are concerned that the published timeframes suggested that the notification period was likely at
about six weeks into the registration timeline.
The notification period in this instance did not
commence until the 26​th of February which was closer to ten weeks into the registration process.
This initial delay immediately put our registration at significant risk. 

While we understand there are a large number of public holidays during the Christmas and New Year
period, but this does not explain the extended delay from the indicated timeline.  

Specifically, the Guide indicates a minimum three-month timeframe if no objections are received.
This period would include a one-month mandatory notification period and a subsequent two-week
period to conclude the process, presumably once the objections are resolved by the Delegate. 

There was a vexatious objection lodged on or around the last day of the notification period. We
responded to the AEC within twenty-four hours.
It is clear the objection does not address or pertain
to the specific criteria on which an objection to registration can be lodged as published by the AEC. 

We have worked on the assumption that our application was lodged with enough time to reasonably
expect it to be completed in time for the party to registered. We have candidates standing by who
have already spent significant sums of money to be prepared to run in the election and we are now
deeply concerned about the likelihood of registration. 

LS7540 Released Document No. 105Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 2 ---

We have acted in good faith and we believe that we have worked with reasonable expectations in
relation to the registration process. We believe that the AEC also has a duty of care in relation to
reasonable timeframes.   

We understand that the AEC will cease work on registration applications once the Writs are issued
and that if our application has not been processed and approved by that date, we will not be able to
participate in the election. Based on the election timelines published by the AEC the latest date the
Writs can be issued by the AEC would be the 8​th of April for an 11​th May election or the 15​th of April
for an 18​th​ May election. 

We need to know now if the AEC sees any scope for the Australian Democrats to be registered in
time to contest the 2019 federal election. If it is still possible to be registered, we implore the AEC to
commit to finalising the process. 

I look forward to your prompt advice in regards our prospects to participate in this election. 

Sincerely 

Elisa Resce 
National President 
Australian Democrats 

4LS7540 Released Document No. 105Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 3 ---

REDACTION CODES 

Personal Information (name) redacted. 

Personal Information (date of birth) redacted. 

Personal Information (photograph) redacted 

Personal Information (facsimile of signature) redacted. 

Personal Information (facsimile of manuscript initialling) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s address) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s telephone number) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s opinion) redacted. 

Personal Information (opinion about individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (employment history) redacted. 

Personal Information (qualifications) redacted. 

Personal Information (health) redacted. 

Personal Information (identifying individual) redacted. 

Business information (Bank Account details) redacted. 

Business information (Billing Account details) redacted. 

Business information (internal operations) redacted. 

Legal Professional Communication redacted. 

Deliberative material redacted. 

Irrelevant material redacted. 

Electoral Roll material redacted. 

Tests, examinations or audits material redacted. 

Management or assessment of personnel material redacted. 

Proper and efficient conduct of the operations of AEC material redacted. 

Lawful methods or procedures for preventing, detecting, investigating, or 
dealing with matters arising out of, breaches or evasions of the law. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

LS7540 Released Document No. 105Freedom of Information Release