

--- Page 1 ---

Minute 

File reference:  18-19-031, 18/581 

To: 

Subject: 

Joanne Reid 
A/g Assistant Commissioner 
Disclosure, Assurance and Engagement 

For Action – application under subsection 126(3) of the Commonwealth
Electoral Act 1918 (the Electoral Act) for registration as a political party 
– issue of notice allowing variation of application – Stop Selling Australia
Party

Purpose 
This minute asks you, as a delegate of the Electoral Commission, to give notice to the applicant 
of the Stop Selling Australia Party (the Party) under subsection 131(1) of the Electoral Act. This 
notice will give the Party the opportunity to vary the application so refusal of the application may 
not be required. 

Authority 
Sections 4, 123, 126, 129 and 131 and subsections 4(1) and 123(1) of the Electoral Act. 

Background 
On 24 November 2018, the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) received all of the 
requirements from the Party for an application for registration as a non-Parliamentary party 
under paragraph 126(1)(b) of the Electoral Act (folio 52). The application included a copy of the 
Party’s constitution (folio 16), an electronic list of between 500-550 members and a statutory 
declaration from the proposed Party secr tary regarding the authenticity of these documents 
(folio 21). The Party indicated that it did not wish to register an abbreviation or party logo  
(folio 32).  On 23 January 2019 and 22 February 2019 the Party provided updates to its 
membership list which impacted on  he  ime taken to assess the application.  

Initial assessment of application 
In the case of a non-Parliamen ary party paragraph 126(1)(b) of the Electoral Act provides that 
the application may be made by 10 members of the party, of whom one is the secretary of the 
party. The application is made by 10 members of the Party, one of which is the Party secretary, 
and sets out the names and addresses of the applicants, and particulars of the capacity in which 
each applicant makes the application (folio 30).  

Assessment of constitution 
Sections 4 and 123 of the Electoral Act define an eligible political party as an organisation the 
object or activity, or one of the objects or activities, of which is the promotion of the election to 
the Senate or to the House of Representatives of a candidate or candidates endorsed by it.  

Subsection 123(1) of the Electoral Act defines an eligible political party as a political party that is 
“established on the basis of a written constitution (however described) that sets out the aims of 
the party”. 

The Party’s constitution meets this requirement because: 

Page 1    Minute 

Releasd under the Freedom of Information Act 1982LS7759 Document No. 25


--- Page 2 ---

•

clause 3.2.16 states an objective of the Party is to “endorse Party candidates for Local,
State and Federal elections” (folio 12).

Assessment of proposed party name  
Name sought: Stop Selling Australia Party  
Section 129 of the Electoral Act prohibits the registration of parties with certain names and 
abbreviations. An assessment of the proposed name was undertaken to ensure it did not 
contravene s 129. The proposed name: 

a) does not comprise more than six words
b)
c)

is not obscene
is not the name, abbreviation or acronym of the name of another political party (not
being a political party that is related to the party to which the application relates) that is a
recognised political party

d) does not so nearly resemble the name, abbreviation or acronym of the name of another

political party (not being a political party that is related to the party to which the
application relates) that is a recognised political party that it is likely to be confused with
or mistaken for that name or that abbreviation or acronym, as the case may be

da) is not one that a reasonable person would think suggests a connection or relationship 
exists between the party and a registered party if that connection or relationship does 
not in fact exist 

e) does not comprise the words ‘Independent Party’ or comprise or contain the word

‘Independent’ and:

i.

the name, or an abbreviation or acronym of the name, of a recognised political
party; or

ii. matter that so nearly resembles the name, or an abbreviation or acronym of the
name, of a recognised political party  hat the matter is likely to be confused with
or mistaken for that name or that abbreviation or acronym, as the case may be.

The federal Register was checked (folios 126-128) and that of each state and territory 
(folios 103-124) for parties with a similar name or abbreviation.  

The following party names contained the word “stop”: 

• Stop Population Growth Now Party (Electoral Commission of South Australia) (folio 110).

The following party abbreviations contained the word “stop”: 

• Stop Population Growth Now (Electoral Commission of South Australia) (folio 110).

The above parties share the word “stop” but share no further similarities with the Party’s 
proposed name. The Party’s proposed name is not the same as that of a recognised political 
party. Furthe , there is enough of a difference between the Party’s name and the above name 
and abbreviation that it is not likely to be confused or mistaken, and a reasonable person would 
not think that a connection or relationship exists between the parties.   

Based on this information the Party’s name is not prohibited under s 129 of the Electoral Act. 

Assessment of membership 
Subsection 123(1) of the Electoral Act defines an eligible political party as a political party that is 
either a Parliamentary party or has at least 500 members. Paragraph 126(2)(ca) of the Electoral 

Page 2    Minute 

Releasd under the Freedom of Information Act 1982LS7759 Document No. 25


--- Page 3 ---

Act states that an application for registration must “include a list of the names of the 500 
members of the party to be relied on for the purposes of registration”.  

The membership list submitted by the Party contained 550 members. This list was checked 
automatically using RMANS, with 404 members identified on the electoral roll. A further 117 
members were manually identified on the electoral roll using GENESIS while 29 members were 
unable to be matched to the roll.  

Fifteen members were identified as duplicates within the list and three members were identified 
as cross party duplicates. See folio 100 for a breakdown of the membership numbers.  

A list of 503 members requires contact with a random sample of 26 members under the formula 
provided by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (folio 94). For the AEC to be satisfied that the 
Party has the required 500 members, one denial of membership is permitted.  

The relevant numbers for this membership test were: 

1.
2.
3.

the random sample size was 26
the AEC attempted to contact 52 members, as some members were uncontactable
the highest 26 responses were:
24 confirmed membership
-
two denied membership.
-

A record of those contacted is at folio 96. Based on this information the Party’s membership list 
failed the membership testing assessment of the applica ion process. 

The Party’s application will be set aside until the def ciencies identified are rectified and an 
updated membership list is either resubmitted or  he application withdrawn. This will be raised 
with the Party in the s 131 notice  

Other procedural application requirements 
The application meets the requirements of paragraphs 126(2)(c), 126(2)(d), 126(2)(e) and 
126(2)(g) of the Electoral Act as it:  
•

set out the name and address of the person who is to be the registered officer of the Party
for the purposes of the Electoral Act
advised that the Party wishes to receive moneys under Division 3 of Part XX of the Electoral
Act
set out the names and addresses of the applicants and particulars of the capacity in which
each applicant makes the application, and

•

•

• was accompanied by a fee of $500.

Conclusion 
An assessment of the Party’s application was undertaken and it was determined that: 
•
•
•

the Party s constitution meets the requirements of s 4 and s 123 of the Electoral Act
he Party’s name is not prohibited under s 129 of the Electoral Act
the Party does not meet the membership requirements of subsection 123(1) and paragraph
126(2)(ca) of the Electoral Act
the application meets the requirements of paragraphs 126(2)(c),126(2)(d),126(2)(e) and
126(2)(g) of the Electoral Act.

•

Based on this information, the Party’s application, in its current form, does not satisfy the 
requirements of Part XI of the Electoral Act.  

Page 3    Minute 

Releasd under the Freedom of Information Act 1982LS7759 Document No. 25


--- Page 4 ---

Subsections 131(1) and (3) of the Electoral Act provide that where the Electoral Commission is 
of the opinion that the application should be refused, the Electoral Commission shall give written 
notice to the applicant that it is of that opinion and that the applicant may lodge a written request 
varying the application in the manner specified. 

The s 131 notice will advise the Party it has the option to: 

•
•

vary the application in the manner specified in the request; or
proceed with the application in the form in which it was lodged.

Page 4    Minute 

Releasd under the Freedom of Information Act 1982LS7759 Document No. 25


--- Page 5 ---

Recommendation: 
That as a delegate of the Electoral Commission for the purposes of subsection 131(1) of the 
Electoral Act, you: 

1. approve the notice under subsection 131(1) advising the registered officer of the Stop

Selling Australia Party, 
form but that the applicants may vary the application so that it will not have to be refused 
(Attachment A).  

, that the application will be refused in its current 

A/g Senior Party Registration Officer 
Parliamentary and Party Registration 

March 2019 

Reviewed by 

Director 
Parliamentary and Party Registration 

March 2019 

Page 5    Minute 

Approved / Not Approved 

Joanne Reid 
A/g Assistant Commissioner 
Delegate of the Electoral Commission 

March 2019 

1Releasd under the Freedom of Information Act 1982LS7759 Document No. 2511