

--- Page 1 ---

Indigenous Franchise KPIs using Centrelink data 

Background 
As Australia’s federal electoral roll does not have a personal Indigenous identifier, estimating the enrolment, 
 rates for Indigenous persons is problematic. Having these key franchise KPIs for the 

Indigenous population is important for Closing the Gap purposes and the AECs focus on how the franchise 
could be better delivered. 

In 2014 the AEC’s Research Section commenced indirect estimation of these figures, using a regression model 
of the relationship between the Indigenous population and each of the three franchise KPIs at a small area 
level, such as polling place catchment or the ABS’ SA2 geography. While the models did not fit the data 
particularly well, the resulting Indigenous enrolment, 
real data, rather than anecdote. Yet the resulting enrolment and turnout rates in particular were alarmingly 
low, and hopefully represented a worst case picture. 

 rates were statistically based on 

Centrelink Data 
Around the same time, the Research Section informally proposed that person-level Centrelink extracts that the 
AEC received occasionally for other Roll validation work, could perhaps be extended to include Centrelink’s 
Indigenous indicator. This came to fruition in 20171. 

As part of the Annual Roll Integrity Review (ARIR), the person-level matching between the Roll and Centrelink 
now included Centrelink’s Indigenous indicator. However as Centrelink customers represent only around half 
of the Roll, the matching (even if perfect) would be far from assigning all enrolments an Indigenous flag. 
Nevertheless, for the first time the AEC has a very large number of enrolled persons, over 6 million, with an 
explicit Indigenous status. 

Enrolment Rate

1.
The enrolment rate, even for all persons regardless of indigenaity, is difficult to calculate reliably due to 
conceptual, collection and methodological differences between the Roll (numerator) and the ABS-based 
enrolment-eligible population (denominator, “EEP”). In the case of the Indigenous population these problems 
are magnified by having no Indigenous identifier on the Roll and less reliable estimates of Indigenous EEP.  

However, matching the Roll to Centrelink data allows a more direct method of estimating the Indigenous 
enrolment rate. It is still subject to quite courageous assumptions, but as fewer are required it likely 
represents an improved approach. In summary: 









For all Centrelink customers with an identified Indigenous or non-Indigenous status, calculate the
proportion on the Roll. This is the raw enrolment rate of Centrelink clients.
Calculate the ratio of the actual AEC enrolment rate versus the Centrelink-based rate, for the same
point in time. This is the overall factor to adjust any Centrelink-based rates to align with AEC
enrolment rates.
Apply the adjustment factor to raw Centrelink-based enrolment rates by Indigenous status to give
Indigenous and non-Indigenous enrolment rates.
This process can be done at the State level, though results will have lower reliability.

NOTE: While this method avoids indirectly modelling Indigenous enrolment rates via geographic 
association, it does assume that any bias in Centrelink clients being enrolled is equal for 
Indigenous and non-Indigenous, and that there are no substantive Indigenous-status biases 
inherent in the Roll-to-Centrelink person matching. 

1 Acknowledge with appreciation the work of the former Electoral Integrity Unit and the IT Branch. 

1919LS7888 Released Document No. 6Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 2 ---

Conclusion and Results 
The Centrelink client file with Indigenous indicator newly available to the AEC has presented an excellent 
opportunity, via matching to the Roll 

, to improve estimation of Indigenous franchise KPIs.  

While the results are subject to a number of non-trivial assumptions, the more direct estimation methods lead 
to a higher likelihood of robust results. The figures should nevertheless still be regarded as indicative only. 

191919LS7888 Released Document No. 6Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 3 ---

INDIGENOUS-STATUS FRANCHISE KPIs 

Non-enrolment (2017) 

KPI 

Indigenous  
29% 

Non-
Indigenous  
3% 

^ enrolment 

INDIGENOUS-STATUS (NON-)ENROLMENT 
30 June 2017 

State 

NSW 
VIC 
QLD 
SA 

WA 
TAS 
NT 
ACT 
AUST 

Indigenous  
17% 
28% 
32% 
34% 
39% 
19% 
30% 
26% 
29% 

Non-
Indigenous  
2% 
4% 
4% 
3% 
3% 
3% 
2% 
1% 
3% 

Notes: 
These modelled national estimates contain many assumptions and cannot be ascribed to any particular sub-national location. 
The absence of an Indigenous identifier on the Federal Roll has been partially supplemented with Centrelink information. 

These figures can be footnoted "unofficial internal AEC modelling". 
Business Intelligence, Research and Electoral Integrity Section. 8 May 2018. 

19191919LS7888 Released Document No. 6Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 4 ---

REDACTION CODES 

Personal Information (name) redacted. 

Personal Information (date of birth) redacted. 

Personal Information (photograph) redacted 

Personal Information (facsimile of signature) redacted. 

Personal Information (facsimile of manuscript initialling) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individual’s address) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s telephone number) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s opinion) redacted. 

Personal Information (opinion about individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (employment history) redacted. 

Personal Information (qualifications) redacted. 

Personal Information (health) redacted. 

Personal Information (identifying individual) redacted. 

Business information (Bank Account details) redacted. 

Business information (Billing Account details) redacted. 

Business information (internal operations) redacted. 

Legal Professional Communication redacted. 

Deliberative material redacted. 

Irrelevant material redacted. 

Electoral Roll material redacted. 

Tests, examinations or audits material redacted. 

Management or assessment of personnel material redacted. 

Proper and efficient conduct of the operations of AEC material redacted. 

Lawful methods or procedures for preventing, detecting, investigating, or 
dealing with matters arising out of, breaches or evasions of the law. 

Trade Secrets. 

Commercial valuable information. 

Financial interests of the Commonwealth. 

Property interests of the Commonwealth. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28