

--- Page 1 ---

Sheridan New

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Thursday, 6 May 2021 4:09 PM
Julie Igglesden
Re: [External] AEC Engagement for the next Federal Election [SEC=OFFICIAL]

Follow Up Flag:
Flag Status:

Follow up
Completed

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open 
attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe. 

Hi Julie, 

Just giving my previous email a bump up. 

Let me know if what I proposed works. 

Kind regards 

On Sun, May 2, 2021 at 9:01 PM 
Hi Julie, 

Hope you are well. 

wrote: 

Just re-confirming that we are able to meet in person (in Canberra) on 14 May 2021. There will be three people 
from my team (including me) attending in-person.  

Noting your comment regarding room suitability in the email before - is it possible for you to find a room that also 
has video conferencing capability? 

We would like to dial in and introduce our Trust and Safety colleagues (based in Singapore) who have oversight of 
TikTok's content moderation policies and respond to election day incidents on-platform. In our prior meetings with 
the WAEC and TEC, they presented an overview of TikTok's election related policies/processes and were able to 
speak to the more technical aspects of our platform.  

Please let me know if there are any issues with including them in the meeting - I am happy to send over an 
attendee list if that helps.  

Kind regards 

On Tue, Apr 20, 2021 at 2:28 PM Julie Igglesden <Julie.Igglesden@aec.gov.au> wrote: 

Afternoon 

,  

1


--- Page 2 ---




--- Page 3 ---

Thank you for sending those options through. 

Friday 14 May works for us. We would also be happy to travel to Canberra to meet you in person (if you are all 
back in office and the COVID-19 situation allows it). 

Also happy to develop a more detailed agenda (in partnership with you) over the next few weeks. 

Have a nice weekend! 

Kind regards, 

On Thu, Apr 15, 2021 at 4:32 PM Julie Igglesden <Julie.Igglesden@aec.gov.au> wrote: 

Good Afternoon 

 and 

,  

Thank you for being in touch.  

Given the agenda themes already outlined, the AEC is interested in scheduling an initial meeting next month. If 
you could advise at your earliest convenience your availability or preference between the times listed below? If 
neither is suitable, happy to discuss and look for some alternatives.  

Friday 14 May | 2:00pm – 3:00pm 

Friday 21 May | 2:00pm - 3:00pm 

Kind Regards 

Julie 

Julie Igglesden | Electoral Interference Coordinator  

Digital Technology & Communications Branch 

3


--- Page 4 ---

Australian Electoral Commission 

T: (02) 6271 4687 X: 21309 M: 

From: Jeff Pope <Jeff.Pope@aec.gov.au>  
Sent: Wednesday, 7 April 2021 6:41 PM 
To: 
Cc: Julie Igglesden <Julie.Igglesden@aec.gov.au>; David Lang <David.Lang@aec.gov.au> 
Subject: RE: [External] AEC Engagement for the next Federal Election [SEC=OFFICIAL] 

> 

Great, thanks 

 and 

, great to meet you both and we will be in touch soon to organise a meeting. 

Regards 

Jeff 

Jeff Pope | Deputy Electoral Commissioner  

Executive Leadership Team 

Australian Electoral Commission 

T: (02) 6271 4619 X: 21001 M: 

From: 
Sent: Wednesday, 7 April 2021 6:29 PM 
To: Jeff Pope <Jeff.Pope@aec.gov.au>; 
Cc: Julie Igglesden <Julie.Igglesden@aec.gov.au>; David Lang <David.Lang@aec.gov.au> 
Subject: Re: [External] AEC Engagement for the next Federal Election [SEC=UNOFFICIAL] 

4


--- Page 5 ---

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open 
attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe. 

Hi Jeff, 

Delighted to meet you and Julie (and also David who's on cc). And I'm adding
Coordinator who is leading on this from our end. 

 here, our Public Policy 

The good news is that we have already taken a highly collaborative approach with other electoral commissions 
around the world (including, closer to home here, with NZ last year, and with WA and Tasmania this year). We 
were in the process of trying to work out who our best point of contact would be at the AEC, so your email is 
timely! 

I'll leave it to 
next months / year or so, and then beyond. 

 to coordinate logistics at our end, and will look forward to working with your team over the 

Best regards, 

On Wed, Apr 7, 2021 at 11:51 AM Jeff Pope <Jeff.Pope@aec.gov.au> wrote: 

Good morning 

I’m writing to you today to outline the AEC’s desire to engage with you and your organisation soon, in advance 
of the next federal election.  

The federal election is due to be held anytime from August 2021 through to May 2022 and, as I’m sure you’ll 
agree, quite a lot has happened in the world of elections and communication since the previous Australian 
federal election held in 2019. This continually evolving landscape makes clear the importance of our mutual 
understanding and, in certain areas, collaboration.  

5


--- Page 6 ---

In addition to our role as the election’s administrator, we chair the Electoral Integrity Assurance Taskforce – a 
cross-Government cooperation between agencies on matters relating to electoral integrity – and we’d envisage 
that our engagement with your organisation would also involve representatives from a couple of the pertinent 
participating Taskforce agencies. With respect to an agenda - we’ll be eager to hear about any recent or pending 
changes to your platform that are of relevance to communication during an electoral event, will provide an 
update ourselves and of course seek to establish the appropriate enquiry and/or referral lines for issues that 
may arise from communication on your platform.  

Julie Igglesden (cc’d into this email) is the AEC’s Electoral Interference Coordinator and will be in touch to setup 
a meeting shortly. If there is a preferred contact for this liaison then please do advise Julie as soon as you’re 
able.  

Regards, 

Jeff 

Jeff Pope APM | Deputy Electoral Commissioner  

National Executive 

Australian Electoral Commission 

T: (02) 6271 4619 | M: 

DISCLAIMER: 

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email and delete all 
copies.  If this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver of 
any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of information in the email or attachments.  

DISCLAIMER: 

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email and delete all 
copies.  If this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver of 
any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of information in the email or attachments.  

6


--- Page 7 ---




--- Page 8 ---

