

--- Page 1 ---




--- Page 2 ---




--- Page 3 ---

From
Sent: Monday, 24 January 2022 4:05 PM 
To: Julie Igglesden <Julie.Igglesden@aec.gov.au> 
Cc: EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au>; Jeff Pope <Jeff.Pope@aec.gov.au> 
Subject: TikTok Election Hub 

3


--- Page 4 ---

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open 
attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe. 

Hi Julie,  

Happy New Year, I hope you had a restful summer shutdown period.  

In addition to the election preparation we at TikTok have been engaging in prior to the New Year (escalation 
channels, dedicated TnS resources, PSA's), we are now also looking to create an in-app 'Election Hub' on our 
platform.  

We created an Election Hub for the last US Presidential election, and it provides a central source of information/links 
(accessed from our Discover Page) for users on our platform to find accurate information on how to register for a 
election, when to vote, how to vote, work out where to vote etc. I have attached some examples of what it would 
roughly look like below:  

4


--- Page 5 ---

We were hoping to be able to use links to the AEC's website (and any other publicly available resources you may 
have) that provide this information in similar fashion to the PSA's we are running with the AEC's support and if 
possible, use the AEC logo in this election hub as a link to the AEC online homepage and to signify to our users that 
the information is reliable and consistent with the AEC.  

I understand any use of logo's/branding probably needs to be run by a few people, so please let me know if I can 
provide more information or let me know if there are any concerns from the outset we can address. Whilst we arent 
really the platform to go to for politics/news we do have young first time voters on TikTok so our view internally is 
that this Election Hub would be useful for many of our Australian users.  

Kind regards  

DISCLAIMER: 

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email and delete all copies.  If 
this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver of any 
confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of information in the email or attachments.  

DISCLAIMER: 

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email and delete all copies.  If 
this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver of any 
confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of information in the email or attachments.  

5