

--- Page 1 ---

Information on this form is collected under the provisions of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
If completing by hand please write clearly and use BLOCK LETTERS and black or blue ink
Please read the notes on page 3 before completing this form

To the Divisional Returning Officer for the Division of

  Candidate 

 of 

 If applicable

1. Your name(s) as they
appear on the Commonwealth
Electoral Roll
or, if not enrolled, the name(s)
under which you are qualified
to enrol

Family name

Given name(s)

2. Given name(s) as you
want them to appear on
the ballot paper, If same
as above, tick the box

3. Do you have silent
enrolment on the
Commonwealth
electoral roll?

  or

 Yes 

 No  

You are not required to disclose your residential address 

 Go to Question 4

Please complete your residential address details

4. Postal address
If same as residential
address provided above, 
tick the box    

   or

5. Contact details
The nomination form will be
displayed publicly at the
declaration of nominations.

Which contact details do you 
authorise the AEC to release to  
the public? Please indicate by  
ticking either the Yes or No  
box on each line.

Do you authorise the AEC to release this address to the public?          

 Yes       

 No

 State 

 Postcode 

Do you authorise the AEC to release this address to the public?          

 Yes       

 No

 State 

 Postcode 

Yes   No

)
)
)

BH (
AH (
Fax (

Mobile

Email

6. Occupation and Gender

Occupation

 Gender

7. I have been endorsed by
a registered political party

 Yes 

 Name of registered political party

  No 

I request that the word ‘Independent’ be printed on the 
ballot paper adjacent to my name

 Yes

AECEF060Nomination of a Member of the House of Representatives Australian Electoral Commission 160516 EF060


--- Page 2 ---

Candidate statement and declaration – Please read the statement on page 3 carefully before signing the nomination form.

I, the candidate named above state that I am an Australian citizen by:

Birth

Date of birth 

Naturalisation

Date citizenship 
granted 

/

/

/

/

Place of 
birth

Other means

Details 

I am at least 18 years of age

I am an elector or qualified to be an elector
I am not, by virtue of section 44 of the Constitution, incapable of being chosen or of sitting as a 
Member of the House of Representatives (see page 3*)

 Yes     

 Yes     

 No

 No

 Yes     

 No

and I declare that:
▪ I am qualified under the Constitution and the laws of the Commonwealth to be elected as a Member of the House of Representatives.
▪ I am not, and do not intend to be, a candidate in any other election to be held on the same day as the election to which the above

nomination relates.

▪ I consent to act as a Member of the House of Representatives for the above Division if elected.
▪ I wish my given name(s) to appear on the ballot paper in the form shown at Question 2 above.
Signature of candidate

Date

/

/

AEC Use Only - Received DRO 
DRO 

        Date

DRO 
Signature

Entered 
in ELMS

Date

/

/

/

/

Time (24 hour)

Initials

Agent form received?

:

Time (24 hour)

Initials

:

 Yes       

 No

Sent to FAD

/

/

AECEF060Nomination of a Member of the House of Representatives Australian Electoral Commission 160516 EF060


--- Page 3 ---

Information on this form is collected under the provisions of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 
This form must be accompanied by one of the Nomination of a Member of the House of Representatives 60a to 60c.

Notes to assist completion
Where the candidate is a part of a bulk nomination the numbers in 
the boxes:  

Candidate statement and declaration
Please read the candidate statement and declaration carefully 
before signing the nomination form.

Candidate  

  of  

should correspond with Part B - Candidates being nominated in the 
form 60a.

Question 2 – Form in which given name(s) to appear on 
ballot paper
A given name for use on the ballot paper must be the candidate’s 
name and may be:
▪ an initial standing for that name, or
▪ a commonly accepted variation of that name (including an
abbreviation, truncation or alternative form of that name).

Question 3
In accordance with the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 
candidates’ place of residence is stated and displayed at the 
declaration of nominations, which takes place 24 hours after 
nominations close, unless they are enrolled as a silent elector.

Candidates other than those with silent enrolment must show their 
residential address and indicate whether they authorise the AEC to 
otherwise release this address to the public.

Question 4
If a postal address is provided, candidates should indicate whether 
they authorise the AEC to release the postal address to the public.

Question 5
The AEC may need to contact candidates or their representatives 
regarding their candidacy. Please provide sufficient contact details 
to provide a clear communication channel. Candidates should 
indicate which, if any, contact details are to be made public.

Question 6
Occupation must be stated. Members of the House of 
Representatives standing for re-election are entitled to show their 
occupation as Member of Parliament. Please also provide gender.

Question 7
Candidates endorsed by registered political parties should 
provide the party name (either in the abbreviated form or full 
party name). These details will appear on the ballot paper under 
the candidate name. 

Candidates nominated by 100 electors can elect to have the word 
Independent shown under their name on the ballot paper.

Candidate information on AEC website
After the declaration of nominations, the AEC publishes candidate 
information to its website. This includes name, occupation and any 
address and contact details candidates have agreed on this form to 
make publicly available.

Your attention is drawn in particular to section 44 of the 
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Australia:

Any person who:

i.

is under any acknowledgment of allegiance, obedience, or
adherence to a foreign power, or is a subject or a citizen or
entitled to the rights or privileges of a subject or a citizen of a
foreign power; or

ii. is attainted of treason, or has been convicted and is under
sentence, or subject to be sentenced, for any offence
punishable under the law of the Commonwealth or of a State
by imprisonment for one year or longer; or

iii. is an undischarged bankrupt or insolvent; or

iv. holds any office of profit under the Crown, or any pension
payable during the pleasure of the Crown out of any of the
revenues of the Commonwealth; or

v. has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any agreement
with the Public Service of the Commonwealth otherwise than
as a member and in common with the other members of an
incorporated company consisting of more than twenty-five
persons;

shall be incapable of being chosen or of sitting as a Senator or a 
member of the House of Representatives.

But subsection (iv) does not apply to the office of any of the 
Queen’s Ministers of State for the Commonwealth, or of any of 
the Queen’s Ministers for a State, or to the receipt of pay, half 
pay, or a pension, by any person as an officer or member of the 
Queen’s navy or army, or to the receipt of pay as an officer or 
member of the naval or military forces of the Commonwealth 
by any person whose services are not wholly employed by the 
Commonwealth.

Candidates who have any doubts about their eligibility, by virtue 
of section 44 of the Constitution, are advised to obtain their own 
legal advice.

For further information refer to the Candidates Handbook and the 
Nomination Guide. 

*Answering ‘Yes’ to the question about eligibility under section 44
of the Constitution asserts eligibility.

A nomination form which has not been signed by the 
candidate cannot be accepted.

This form cannot be submitted until after the writ for the 
election has been issued.

Appointment of Candidate Agent
Candidates have the option of appointing an Agent to act on 
their behalf under the election funding and financial disclosure 
provisions of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918. If you 
choose to appoint an Agent you should complete an Appointment 
of Candidate Agent form and lodge it with the AEC before the 
close of nominations. Copies are available from AEC offices and 
the AEC website at www.aec.gov.au

AECEF060Nomination of a Member of the House of Representatives Australian Electoral Commission 160516 EF060