

--- Page 1 ---

Report of Dr Michael Turner 

Acknowledgement, Instructions & Details About the Author 

1.  Name & Address 

1.1. 

1.2. 

My name is Michael Thomas Eugeniusz Turner PhD MSc BSc CMRS 

My place of work is C|T Group Research. Strategies. Results., Level 26, 
Governor Macquarie Tower, 1 Farrer Place, Sydney, 2000, New South Wales, 
Australia 

2.  Acknowledgement 

2.1. 

I confirm that I have read the following documents and agree to be bound by 
them: 
2.1.1. 

The Federal Court of Australia: Harmonised Expert Witness Code 
of Conduct 
The AAT guidelines on Persons Giving Expert and Opinion 
The Federal Court of Australia: Expert Evidence Practice Note 

2.1.2. 
2.1.3. 

3.  Instructions 

3.1. 

Attached is a letter of instruction that I received from Harpur Phillips dated 
3rd March 2021 to undertake a voter research survey with appropriate 
parameters and provide a report in relation to the results of that survey 
(Appendix 7). 

3.2.  On 18th March 2021, I provided to Harpur Philips, the research report that is 

contained in appendix 6. 

3.3. 

Attached is a letter of instruction from Harpur Phillips dated 29th June 2021, 
to provide a further supplementary report in relation to the original research 
report (Appendix 8). 

4.  Qualifications & Experience 

4.1. 

I am a trained social and political scientist, having worked in the fields of 
social, political and market research for more than a decade. I am qualified in 
the practice of research methods, having completed methods-based courses 
at both Bachelors and Masters degree level. My full curriculum vitae is 
provided in appendix 1. 

4.2.  My Masters degree in Social Research covered many areas of research 

methods, including quantitative data analysis, survey design, sampling and 
analysis of quantitative results. My Masters thesis focused on the 
quantitative analysis of public opinion data. 

1


--- Page 2 ---

4.3. 

4.4. 

4.5. 

4.6. 

4.7. 

I continued methods training during my doctoral studies in Political Science 
at The Elections Centre, Plymouth University. My PhD thesis focused 
significantly on the quantitative analysis of elections results and survey data1. 

Since my academic studies, I have continued training, attending many 
renowned courses on survey design and analysis, across several institutions 
and industry bodies. Most relevant to this research, are the methods courses 
that I have attended at the University of Essex, the University of Vienna, and 
the University of Oxford. 

I have also conducted industry recognised short courses in experimental 
survey designs run by the Market Research Society in the UK. All these 
courses have some relevance for the conduct and analysis of this research 
project. 

I am a certified member of the Market Research Society (MRS), a member of 
the Research Society (RS) and a Fellow of The Royal Statistical Society 
(RSS).  

Being members of these industry bodies binds me to higher standards of 
professional practice of research and statistical analysis. I am obliged, in my 
professional activities, to uphold the MRS Code of Conduct, to comply with 
the RS Code and abide by the RSS Code of Conduct. 

4.8.  My experience also includes working to produce representative and accurate 

surveys that gather official population estimates, for the Office for National 
Statistics (ONS), the national statistics agency for the UK. 

4.9. 

4.10. 

4.11. 

During my time as an Assistant Methodologist in the methodology 
department at the ONS, I specialised in sample design and estimation, 
working on projects such as the Census Non-Response Linkage Study 
(CNRLS), which sought to understand how to make opt-in surveys more 
accurate by using data from the Census, which is compulsory. 

I was also responsible for the sample design of several key surveys, to 
ensure that they were representative of the population. 

Since my time at the ONS, I have held senior positions at several leading 
social, political and market research firms. 

4.12.  Though I am a methods generalist, I have built up substantial expertise in 
quantitative survey methods, design, and analysis. I have produced robust 
research and insight for a range of academic institutions, corporations, 
media, charitable organisations, government, and official agencies, including 
the ONS and the Electoral Commission in the UK. 

1 Turner, M (2014). Incumbency Effects in English Local Elections 1974-2010: Assessing the Advantage of 
Electoral Defence, University of Plymouth, URL: https://pearl.plymouth.ac.uk/handle/10026.1/2994 

2


--- Page 3 ---

Research Design & Methodology 

5.  Purpose of the Project & Considerations 

5.1. 

The purpose of this research project was to provide robust evidence to 
identify the impact of including a political party named “The New Liberals” 
into the voting process in Australian Federal elections. The following 
questions guided the research design and analysis of results: 
5.1.1. 

Does the inclusion of a party called ‘The New Liberals’ make it more 
difficult for voters to correctly identify the political party that they 
want to vote for? 
Does the inclusion of a political party called ‘The New Liberals’ lead 
to confusion, among voters, about the nature of the relationship 
between ‘The New Liberals’ and other political parties, that are 
already registered? 

5.1.2. 

5.3. 

5.4. 

5.2.  When designing the research approach required to sufficiently answer these 
research questions, several primary criteria were taken into account. 
First, it is important to have the ability to simulate the voting process as 
closely as practically possible in a private environment, free from interviewer 
and social desirability biases.  
The voting process is a text-based exercise for voters. They follow written 
instructions, not oral ones. The ballot paper is not read aloud for all voters by 
polling officials. As is outlined in the Australian Electoral Commission’s 
(AEC’s) own official resources, it is important “to read and follow the 
directions on the ballot paper to make sure your vote is counted”2. In other 
words, the best way to simulate the voting process is for our sample to take a 
text-based, self-completion approach. 
Second, to firmly establish whether voters were confused, or truly able to 
correctly identify their political party of choice, the ability to convey more 
detailed information to voters, about each political party, after they have 
given their vote intention, would be required. 
To know if The New Liberals are seen by voters as a separate political party 
from existing ones, or a related, or even the same political party, we must be 
able to corroborate voters’ intentions. We can do this by presenting them 
with non-political, factual information about each party, that will not appear 
on the ballot paper, and therefore cannot be considered simply in the act of 
voting. 
Information such as the party leader, the year of their formation and the 
nature of the relationship between the parties has to be presented to voters 

5.6. 

5.5. 

5.7. 

2 Voting in Australia, Australian Electoral Commission, pp14, URL: https://education.aec.gov.au/teacher-
resources/files/voting-in-australia.pdf 

3


--- Page 4 ---

5.8. 

5.9. 

for them to make an informed decision about who the party is, and whether 
they intended to vote for them. 
Finally, the ability to run an experimental design is essential in order to 
provide robust evidence that establishes the causal effect of inclusion of ‘The 
New Liberals’ on the ballot, and the magnitude of any electoral impact. 
For this reason, a sample size of more than n=2,000 would be required to 
provide sufficient confidence in the estimates provided. This will mean that 
each of the four different ballot papers required to be evaluated will have a 
minimum sample of approximately n=500. 

5.10.  The ballot designs were as follows.  

Ballot A: The New Liberals are not displayed (a control ballot A to compare 
results against).  
Ballot B: The New Liberals are displayed below the Liberal Party (test ballot). 
Ballot C: The New Liberals are displayed above the Liberal Party (test ballot). 
Ballot D: New Liberals are displayed but the Liberal Party is not displayed 
(test ballot). 
By simulating different levels of prominence for the Liberal Party and The 
New Liberals, while keeping other factors constant, the experimental design 
ballot evaluation can confirm whether inclusion of The New Liberals 
disproportionately confuses Liberal voters. 
If voters felt The New Liberals were an entirely separate party, unrelated to 
the Liberal Party, then there is no reason to suggest that their inclusion and 
position on the ballot would disproportionately impact on the Liberal party, 
while leaving other political parties, across the political spectrum, relatively 
unchanged. 

5.11. 

5.12. 

5.13.  An example ballot paper for Federal elections to the House of 

Representatives (Figure 1, Appendix 4) shows clearly that a Liberal Party of 
Australia candidate and a candidate for The New Liberals can be placed 
some distance away from each other (due to random order of the 
candidates/political parties). Therefore, there is a high chance that voters will 
see and read ‘The New Liberals’ before knowing if there is a candidate 
standing for the Liberal Party. 
In this scenario, ballot order effects are very likely to lead to erroneous 
results if voters conflate the two parties or if they feel that two parties are 
related or connected in the same way that other the Coalition parties are, or 
divisions within political parties.  

5.14. 

4


--- Page 5 ---

5.15.  The ballot order effect is well-known phenomenon confirmed by the 

academic publications for both experimental election design3 and for actual 
election results in the UK4, and Australia5. 

5.16.  Given these primary considerations, it is clear that a computer-assisted, self-
completion, text-based approach would be required for this research. 
It is worth noting that a telephone survey approach was ruled out on several 
grounds, including, but not limited to: 
5.17.1. 

5.17. 

5.17.2. 

5.17.3. 

5.17.4. 

First, that the introduction of an interviewer in the process could 
lead to erroneous effects, such as interviewer and social 
desirability biases, which are well known in social and market 
research6. 
Second, the inability to simulate as closely as practically possible, 
the voting process, such as reading instructions and observing a 
mock ballot. 
Third, in order to verify whether voters intended to vote for a 
particular party, there is a requirement to convey significant and 
detailed information about several political parties to voters. It is an 
unreasonable expectation for voters to answer this question on an 
informed basis, without it available to them to consider in written 
form. 
Fourth, telephone response rates have been in significant decline in 
recent years7, and when probability-based survey designs have low 
response rates, the tools that are used for remediation, are similar, 
if not identical, to those used for non-probability samples8. This 
means there is likely no benefit in taking a telephone or a paper-
based approach from a sampling perspective. The bias introduced 
by high levels of non-response is unlikely to guarantee more 
accurate results than an adequately weighted non-probability 
design. 

5.18.  The only probability-based survey approach that would yield any material 

benefit to the sample design, whilst meeting the modal criteria, would have 
been a simple random sample, household, computer assisted personal 

3 Johnson, J & Miles, C (2011). Order effects of ballot position without information-induced confirmatory bias, 
British Politics, pp479-490, URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1057/bp.2011.26 
4 Webber, R et al (2012). Ballot Order Positional Effects in British Local Elections, 1973-2011, Parliamentary 
Affairs, Vol 67(1), pp119-136, URL: https://academic.oup.com/pa/article-abstract/67/1/119/1539298 
5 King, A & Leigh, A (2009). Are Ballot Order Effects Heterogeneous?, Social Science Quarterly, Vol 90(1), 
pp71-87, URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1540-6237.2009.00603.x 
6 Alazar, M (1990). Interviewer Bias: How it Affects Survey Research, AHAOHN Journal, Vol 38(12), pp568-
569, URL: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/216507999003801203 
7 Kennedy, C & Hartig, H (2019). Response rates in telephone surveys have resumed their decline. Pew 
Research Center. 27/02/2019, URL: https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/02/27/response-rates-
in-telephone-surveys-have-resumed-their-decline/ 
8 Kennedy, C et al (2016). Evaluating Online Nonprobability Surveys. Pew Research Center, 02/05/2016, 
URL: https://www.pewresearch.org/methods/2016/05/02/evaluating-online-nonprobability-surveys/ 

5


--- Page 6 ---

interview (CAPI) approach. A computer-based, self-completion survey that is 
delivered to households via trained interviewers. 

5.19.  This approach would have been both impractical, and prohibitively expensive 
to conduct, for little additional benefit to a research project of this scope and 
nature. Even for a very short survey, the fieldwork required would have taken 
several weeks, and could have cost several hundred thousand dollars. 
5.20.  Trained and experienced researchers regularly make judgements about the 

5.21. 

size and scope of studies that are required to give adequate evidence to 
answer research questions. Researchers identify the appropriate approach 
and design, based on the timeframe, resources and level of precision 
required to come to a set of conclusions that we can be confident about. 
In conclusion, given the objectives of this research project, and key 
considerations outlined above, it is my expert view that the optimal approach 
and most appropriate research design for this project, was for the survey to 
be conducted online, via a self-completion survey approach, of sufficient 
sample size (n=2000+), using commercially available panel providers, taking 
careful consideration of the sample design (i.e. stratification), and following 
best practice guidance on questionnaire design and analysis of results. 

6.  Overview of Approach 

6.1. 

6.2. 

6.3. 

6.4. 

The overall approach taken was typical of much of the high-quality public 
opinion and market research that is produced for academic, commercial, and 
public policy focused organisations. Though there are very slight differences 
across the designs, the general approach is similar to polls such as ANUPoll9, 
Newspoll10, the Global Consumer Confidence Index11, and polling by the Lowy 
Institute12. 
The research findings are based on results from survey responses of 
n=2,036 voters aged 18 years and over, who are eligible to vote in Australian 
Federal Elections. 
The fieldwork was conducted between the 6th and 9th of March 2021 using an 
online approach. 
The online research panel comprised a number of traditional actively 
managed market research panels that either adhere to the ESOMAR 
standards or are ISO20252 certified. Multi-source sampling approach aimed 
to mitigate any potentially inherent bias that might occur from using a single 
source of online sample. 

9 Methodology, ANUPoll, Australian National University, 
https://csrm.cass.anu.edu.au/research/surveys/anupoll/methodology 
10 Ramadila, N (2018). Australian Polling Council: Public Polling Methodology Statements, YouGov, 
18/05/2021, https://au.yougov.com/news/2021/05/18/apc/ 
11 Jackson, C & Silverstein, K (2021). Global consumer confidence at highest reading since March 2020, 
Ipsos, 17/06/2021, URL: https://www.ipsos.com/en/global-consumer-confidence-June-2021 
12 The Lowey Institute Poll, 2021 Methodology, https://poll.lowyinstitute.org/report/2021/methodology 

6


--- Page 7 ---

6.5. 

6.6. 

6.7. 

6.8. 

Participation was by invitation only. Invitations were sent at random (a 
double-blinded selection process) to members of online panels, via a 
stratified design with proportions set according to age-sex interlocking and 
state/territory. These were based on Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) 
Census results from 2016. 
The questionnaire design, fieldwork, and analysis of survey results followed 
code of conduct and best practice guidance from both The Research 
Society13 and the Market Research Society14. 
As per industry standards, all participants gave their consent for survey 
responses to be used for market research purposes, by opting-in to the 
study via a process of informed consent. 
Calibration weights were used to ensure that the final sample was 
representative of the Australian electorate, using weighting targets derived 
from official population statistics, and Federal election results collected by 
the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC). 

7.  Questionnaire Design 

7.1. 

7.2. 

7.3. 

7.4. 

7.5. 

The questionnaire (Appendix 1) was developed with the intention of collecting 
quantitative evidence that is both representative and statistically 
generalisable, to help answer the research questions detailed above. 
Careful consideration was given to the questionnaire design. Specifically, 
care was taken to minimise any bias that may arise from question ordering, 
wording, or the order of response options. 
To ensure that the survey conformed to the established understanding of 
survey response processes, such as ensuring the comprehension of 
questions, that they have reasonable retrieval and judgement requirements, 
and have adequate response frames15, the survey was drafted entirely by me, 
drawing on my more than 10 years of experience as a social researcher and 
a highly qualified market research professional. 
As is standard practice in market research, the survey was then piloted on a 
small sample of respondents (n=30). An optional, text response, feedback 
box was given at the end of the survey, which returned no queries or 
concerns about the design of questions, or the questionnaire overall. 
The feedback box was then removed, before the survey was full launched for 
the remaining n=2,006 responses. 

7.6.  Where practical, the order of questions, and question response options were 

randomised. These have been detailed in the questionnaire (Appendix 1). 

13 Best practice for interviews and questionnaires, The Research Society, April 2021, URL: 
https://researchsociety.com.au/documents/item/2800 
14 MRS Guidelines for Online Research (2014), Market Research Society, URL: 
https://www.mrs.org.uk/pdf/2014-09-01%20Online%20Research%20Guidelines.pdf  
15 Tourangeau, R et al (2000). The Psychology of Survey Response, Cambridge University Press, pp7-16 

7


--- Page 8 ---

7.7. 

Key considerations that were taken into account in the questionnaire design 
include: 
7.7.1. 

Ensuring that key prevalence questions, such as 9a, 9b, 9c, 9d, 11, 
12, 13, and 14, were placed earlier in the survey to ensure that 
statements containing both the name and details of ‘The New 
Liberals’ did not have an influence on responses to these questions. 
Prevalence questions are designed to accurately measure the 
proportion of people with a particular view, or voting intention, at a 
particular timepoint. To get accurate results it is important to 
minimise the placement of subjective content that may raise their 
awareness of an issue, or in this case a political party, in advance of 
asking them. 
Questions that were less likely to be impacted by the presentation 
of new information to respondents, such as attitudinal statements 
requiring judgment, or clarification of previous responses, were 
asked towards the end of the survey in order to ensure that the 
new information did not impact on questions that sought to identify 
what voters understood about the specific nature of the 
relationship between the Liberal Party of Australia, and ‘The New 
Liberals’. 

7.7.2. 

7.7.3.  Where practically possible, question answer options were either 

randomly rotated, or the direction of agree/disagree Likert scales16 
was randomly assigned (i.e. randomly ‘flipped’) in order to ensure 
that the order of response options did not impact or bias results in 
a particular way (Appendix 2). 

7.8. 

7.9. 

Given the requirement for quantitative results that are both robust and 
generalisable, the use of clear and plain language closed questions was 
favoured over ‘loosely framed’ open questions. 
Survey researchers tend to favour closed-ended questions as they are 
simpler to understand and help clarify the meaning of the question for 
respondents (see Tourangeau et al. 200017). 

7.10.  Open-ended questions can suffer from issues of generalisability, 

categorisation, and bias, including but not limited to: 
7.10.1. 

Respondents to open-ended questions will often give different 
degrees of detail when answering, which can be associated with 
different levels of engagement. If more engaged respondents give 
clearer, more thorough, and more detailed responses, then this will 
significantly bias the coding and classification of their responses in 
favour of a more highly engaged set of respondents. 

16 A Likert scale is a closed-ended scale question, that enables people to self-report the extent to which 
they agree or disagree with a given proposition. 
17 Tourangeau, R et al (2000). The Psychology of Survey Response, Cambridge University Press, pp231 

8


--- Page 9 ---

7.10.2.  Using open-ended questions can lead to some answers becoming 
unconnected or lost in detail that is either insignificant or irrelevant 
to the topic we are interested in. An average voter cannot be 
expected to understand intricate detail of the Commonwealth 
Electoral Act. So, in circumstances where the subject matter may 
be difficult to understand, or requires significant expertise, or 
background knowledge, it is better for research professionals to 
craft clear and easy to understand closed questions. 

7.10.3.  Analysis can become too focused on answers from respondents of 

advantaged groups, such as the highly literate, older respondents, 
those who regularly write or use computers, which will bias results 
in favour of the experienced and technically skilled18, and could 
result in greater survey drop-out rates19. 

7.11. 

These concerns are just some that led the report author to conclude that 
open-ended questions would provide little, if any, additional benefit for this 
research project. Consequently, the questionnaire design favoured an 
approach that gave respondents as much freedom of response as was 
reasonable, within a closed-end response environment. 

7.12.  The questionnaire design followed code of conduct and best practice 

guidance from both The Research Society and the Market Research Society. 
Market research industry guidance includes a requirement that participants 
of any market research process should give their consent to participate in 
the study on an informed basis about how their response data will be used. 
This is the case, no matter the mode through which data is collected, online, 
telephone, or face-to-face. 

7.13.  All respondents of this study were informed that their responses would be 
anonymised and used for market research purposes (Appendix 1). The final 
sample of respondents opted-in to the research process by giving their 
consent for use of their data for research purposes. 

8.  Survey Sample 

8.1. 

The process taken to achieve a representative sample of Australian voters 
for this research project, is similar in nature, to other online market research 
projects that I have been commissioned to undertake in the past. It is now a 
standard industry approach used regularly by social and market research 
firms, for commercial and government clients, in Australia and globally. 

18 Reja, U et al (2003). Open-ended vs. Close-ended Questions in Web Questionnaires, Advances in 
Methodology and Statistics, Vol 19, pp173-174, URL: https://1library.net/document/zp7dm34z-open-ended-
vs-close-ended-questions-web-questionnaires.html 
19 Desai, S & Reimers, (2019). Comparing the use of open and closed questions for Web-based measures of 
the continued-influence effect, Behavior Research Methods, Vol 51, pp1426-1440, URL: 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.3758/s13428-018-1066-z 

9


--- Page 10 ---

8.2. 

8.3. 

8.4. 

8.5. 

8.6. 

8.7. 

The survey was conducted online, with invitations sent to a sample of online 
panellists via a random invitation stratified design that was representative of 
adult voters in Australia. 
In order to send invitations to a sample of residents, I used an intermediary 
exchange, who gave access to a number of specialist panel companies, 
sometimes referred to as ‘panel providers’. These panel providers are 
responsible for engaging, recruiting, and managing approximately 1.57 million 
residents living in Australia. 
Participants are typically paid a small and standardised fee to take part in 
market research surveys, based on the length of each survey that they 
complete. 
A wide range of social and market research studies, for commercial and 
government clients, is conducted in this way. 
Although I was responsible for the sample design (i.e. setting the strata and 
final sample targets), and for designing and hosting the online questionnaire, I 
was not responsible for inviting Australian residents to participate and had no 
knowledge or means to invite people to take part. This was the responsibility 
of the panel provider. 
Respondents were invited through a randomised, double-blinded process. 
Neither me, nor the online panels, nor respondents, influenced which specific 
individuals could take part. The process for selecting panellists to invite, is an 
automated and randomised one. 

8.8.  Once the stratification targets were set, panellists were selected at random 

within key strata. Sample stratification targets were age-sex interlocking and 
state/territory. These were based on Australian Bureau of Statistics 
population estimates and data from the 2016 Census. The target sample 
structure can be found in table 1, below. 
These selected panellists were then invited to take part in a study, the 
content of which they did not know. 
In total, 71 panels were used, via an intermediary exchange. 
The panel provider sends all randomly selected panellists a notification, 
usually via email, but also via other means, that contains the length of the 
survey, the expected reward for completion, and a web address link to the 
survey. No information about the survey’s subject or content is provided in 
advance. 
If they have received the invitation, and would like to take part, then they can 
click the link in the invitation where they will be taken to the start of the online 
hosted survey. The survey was hosted and run by me. 

8.9. 

8.10. 
8.11. 

8.12. 

8.13.  When they arrive at the web address, they are given information about how 

their data may be used and the length of the survey. They will be asked to 
consent to their data being used for market research purposes, which forms 
the basis of question 1 of the questionnaire (Appendix 2). 

10


--- Page 11 ---

8.14. 

‘Soft’ quota survey completion caps were set for age-sex groups (10%), and 
state/territories (25%) in order to mitigate the effects of differential non-
response. This is a typical approach used widely in market and social 
research20. 

8.15.  Approximately 11,110 respondents were invited to take part in the survey. 
8.16.  The total number of eligible residents who started the survey was n=2,265, 

this puts the estimated response rate at approximately 20.4%, which is 
considered typical for online research21. 

8.17.  After screening, the survey had a completion rate of 90%, meaning that of 

the 2,265 people who started the survey, 2,036 completed it. 

8.18.  The final completed sample size was n=2,036 respondents, who were all 

8.19. 

Australian residents aged 18 years and over, and eligible to vote in Australian 
Federal elections. This forms the final dataset used for analysis.  
It is now standard in the social and market research industry to assign 
confidence intervals to similarly designed online survey research. Examples 
include but are not limited to; YouGov’s Newspoll22 which takes a classical 
approach to calculating the margin of error, and online polling conducted by 
market research firm Ipsos MORI23 which uses Bayesian Credibility 
Intervals24. 

8.20.  Online, random invitation, stratified design approaches have also been shown 

to be as accurate, if not more so, than modern-day random digit dial (RDD) 
telephone surveys, with the correct weighting approach25. 

8.21.  The ‘panel providers’ used were actively managed market research suppliers, 

and all are ISO2025226 compliant and all comply with the standards that 
ESOMAR27 provides. 

8.22.  These suppliers recruit panellists using a variety of approaches, including but 
not limited to, random probability designed surveys, face-to-face and 
telephone studies, referral programmes, direct marketing, and online adverts. 
In order to mitigate any inherent bias that might occur from using a single 
source of panel provider, based on their recruitment or management style, a 

8.23. 

20 What are opinion polls? Guidance on how to read opinion polls, The Research Society, January 2021, 
https://researchsociety.com.au/documents/item/3063 
21 Nulty, D (2008). The adequacy of response rates to online and paper surveys: what can be done?, 
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, Vol 33(3), pp301-314, URL: 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02602930701293231 
22  Ramadila, N (2018). Australian Polling Council: Public Polling Methodology Statements, YouGov, 
18/05/2021, URL: https://au.yougov.com/news/2021/05/18/apc/ 
23 Polling Methodology Disclosure Statements, Ipsos, URL: https://www.ipsos.com/en-au/polling-
methodology-disclosure-statements 
24 Credibility Intervals for Online Polling (2012). Ipsos Public Affairs, URL: 
https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/2017-03/IpsosPA_CredibilityIntervals.pdf 
25 Kennedy, C et al (2016). Evaluating Online Nonprobability Surveys. Pew Research Center, 02/05/2016, 
URL: https://www.pewresearch.org/methods/2016/05/02/evaluating-online-nonprobability-surveys/ 
26 ISO20252 is the international standard for organisations that produce market, opinion, and social 
research, including insights and data analytics. 
27 European Society for Opinion and Marketing Research (ESOMAR) is a membership organization for 
market, social, and opinion researchers. 

11


--- Page 12 ---




--- Page 13 ---

8.28.  The results show that final, pre-weighting sample is reasonably close to 

expected counts based on official population statistics. This suggests that 
the sample is, generally, of a good quality. 

9.  Post-Fieldwork Weighting 

9.1. 

To ensure the results were both accurate, and generalisable, calibration 
weights were applied to the final collected data. Calibration weighting is an 
approach for reducing the error of population estimates that are produced 
from a survey sample by, applying mild adjustments to the sample. 
Calibration weighting does this by adjusting certain ‘calibration’ variables, to 
equal known, or better-estimated population totals. 

9.2.  Weighting targets included age-sex interlocking, state/territory, level of 

9.3. 

9.4. 

9.5. 

9.6. 

9.7. 

9.8. 

9.9. 

education and 2019 Federal election primary vote. 
Targets were derived from population statistics collected by the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics (ABS), as well as the results of the 2019 Federal election 
collected by the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC). 
A raking technique was used for calculating the weights, which is a typical 
approach in market and social research28. 
The smallest weight assigned was 0.46, and the largest weight was 2.32, 
suggesting that the weighting efficiency was good, and the final collected 
sample was reasonably close to national population statistics for weighting 
targets. 
The effective sample size is a measure of the precision of a survey sample. 
Even if a survey research study has a sample of 1,000 respondents, an 
effective sample size of 500 would suggest that the final weighted results 
are no more robust than a well-executed, but un-weighted simple random 
sample of 500 respondents. So, it is important to take the weighting design 
into consideration when assigning confidence to survey research. 
Taking the weighting design into account, the final efficiency for this study 
was 91.5%. This means that across the study as a whole, results for the poll 
had an approximate effective sample size of n=1,863. 
Please note that efficiency estimates will vary slightly across the question 
results as the impact of the weight differs slightly for different statistics 
calculated. 
An approximate margin of error breakdown has been calculated for the study 
toplines at the 95% confidence level (Table 2 below). 

28 Mercer, A et al (2018). For Weighting Online Opt-In Samples, What Matters Most? Pew Research Center, 
26/01/2018. https://www.pewresearch.org/methods/2018/01/26/how-different-weighting-methods-work/ 

13


--- Page 14 ---




--- Page 15 ---




--- Page 16 ---




--- Page 17 ---

Appendix 1 – Michael Turner PhD MSc BSc CMRS – 
Curriculum Vitae 

Academic Qualifications 
PhD, Political Science, The Elections Centre, Plymouth University, 2009-2013 

My doctoral study included the detailed quantitative analysis of survey and elections 
data to examine whether electoral advantage can be assigned to incumbency, and if so, 
to estimate its magnitude. 

Thesis: Incumbency Effects in English Local Elections 1974-2010: Assessing the 
Advantage of Electoral Defence. 

Synopsis: The thesis serves as a major quantitative examination of the effects of 
incumbency and campaigns in English local elections. The research presents evidence in 
support of the hypothesis, that councillors have a mild, yet significant advantage and 
constructs models to estimate its nature and electoral effect. The study utilises both 
elections results and survey data. 

Supervisors: Professor Colin Rallings & Professor Michael Thrasher 

MSc, Social Research, Plymouth University, 2008-2009 – Pass with Merit 

My postgraduate study focused extensively on social research fundamental design, 
methods, analysis, and reporting of results, with modules teaching both quantitative and 
qualitative approaches to research practice. Survey design, sampling, analysis, and 
reporting were included as part of the programme. 

Thesis: Do Londoners View the Implementation of a Directly Elected Mayor as a 
Success of Failure? 

Synopsis: The thesis assessed the introduction of a directly elected mayor in the capital 
and whether it was viewed as a success through the eyes of Londoners. Primarily a 
quantitative analysis, the research utilised elections, aggregate polling, and survey data. 
The results showed that Londoner’s were relatively unfamiliar with the nuances of the 
Supplementary Vote electoral system, that they treated the mayoral post in a 
representative democracy style and were willing to break with their traditional party ties 
to vote for candidates they believed to hold the best personal qualities to run the city. 

Supervisor: Professor Colin Rallings 

BSc, International Relations with Politics, University of Plymouth, 2004-2008 – 
Upper Second Class with Honours 

My undergraduate study included several modules that taught social research methods, 
including primary data collection, data analysis, and reporting practice. 

17


--- Page 18 ---

Thesis: An Analysis of the European Union’s Energy Security 

Supervisor: Professor Karl Cordell 

Relevant Professional Courses 
Quantitative Data Analysis – Pass with Distinction - July 2012, Dr Sona Golder, 45th 
Essex Summer School in Social Science Data Analysis – University of Essex 

Course details: The Essex Summer School in Social Science Data Analysis provides 
intensive social science methods training with instruction from an internationally 
renowned faculty. The course covered a wide range of statistical methods for analysing 
survey data, including core statistical methods, such as crosstabulation, t-tests, analysis 
of variance, correlation, and various forms of regression. These methods are widely used 
by academic and professional researchers in a range of fields such as political, social 
and market research. 

Comparative Cross-National Survey Design – Pass with Distinction – February 2012, Dr 
Ineke Stoop, European Consortium of Political Research Winter School in Methods and 
Techniques, University of Vienna 

Course details: The European Consortium of Political Research (ECPR) is the leading 
scholarly society for political scientists in Europe. The Winter School is designed to 
equip participants with valuable new knowledge for their research. The course covered 
key information about how to robustly design survey research, but also how to 
systematically collect good-quality data for statistical analysis, how to compile and 
manage these data. 

Conjoint Analysis Masterclass - November 2017, Ray Poynter – Market Research 
Society 

Course details: The Market Research Society runs a number of short courses for 
research professionals. This course provided detail on how to manage, design, and 
interpret a wide range of experimental design projects, including conjoint analysis, 
MaxDiff scaling and other variants of Discrete Choice Modelling (DCM) This course 
covered material directly relevant to the experimental design ballot evaluation 
conducted in this research. 

Other professional courses 

Mixed Methods Research – Unassessed - August 2010, Dr Jason Seawright, 43rd Essex 
Summer School in Social Science Data Analysis – University of Essex 

Multilevel Analysis - April 2012, Prof Tom Snijders & Daniel Stegmueller, Oxford Spring 
School in Quantitative Methods for Social Research – University of Oxford 

18


--- Page 19 ---

A Practical Application of Behavioural Economics in Research – Understanding Consumer 
Behaviour – December 2017, Laura Parker - MRS 

Introduction to Behavioural Economics – November 2017, Anthony Tasgal – MRS 

Professional Experience 
Head of Research (Director) – C|T RSR (Jan 2019 – Present) 

In my current role, I specialise in producing public opinion, communications, social, public 
policy and political insight for major corporations and organisations, in Australia and 
across the globe. 

The research tends to involve the collection of primary data, via quantitative and 
qualitative approaches. This includes online surveys, which then feed into the production 
of strategic research reports through statistical analysis of the data. 

At C|T, I work across the full range of subject areas, and tailor research approaches and 
methods to the project requirements, often utilising online panel-invitation survey 
designs, when necessary, to produce accurate statistics and robust insight for our 
partners and clients. 

I am responsible for ensuring that C|T RSR’s research outputs are produced to the 
highest standards of practice and oversee the design and analysis of all major research 
projects, including online survey research projects. 

I continue to produce research projects end-to-end, from inception and design to 
analysis and reporting. 

Director of Research & Head of Polling - BMG Research (May 2015 – Jan 2019) 

I specialised in the conduct of public opinion, public policy, elections, and social 
research. I led the research approach and methodology design for major projects for the 
business and worked across the full range of quantitative survey research methods and 
statistical analyses. 

I was the company representative to the British Polling Council (BPC) and principal 
academic liaison. I was programme leader for the BMG Research Graduate Training 
Programme & the summer placements scheme, principally because of my academic 
background and methods training. 

I designed, managed, analysed, and reported on more than two hundred survey research 
projects that required a detailed understanding of sample design, survey design, 
statistical analysis, and reporting to the highest industry standards, across a range of 
approaches, including online survey research. 

I produced research for several key institutions including universities, government 
departments and official agencies. These include but are not limited to; the Office for 
National Statistics (ONS), the UK Electoral Commission, the Department for the 

19


--- Page 20 ---

Environment, Farming and Agriculture (Defra), Department for Transport, Department 
for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS), the Home Office, the Department 
for International Trade (DIT), the University of Essex, and the University of Sheffield. 

Director of Political & Social Research, Survation (Oct 2014 – May 2015) 

During my time at Survation, I specialised in the conduct of elections, political and social 
research. I worked across the full range of research methods, including online and 
telephone survey research approaches. 

I was responsible for designing, managing, analysing, and reporting on survey research 
projects which required a detailed understanding of sample design, survey design, 
statistical analysis, and reporting to industry standards. 

Assistant Methodologist, Office for National Statistics (ONS) (Sep 2013 – Oct 2014) 

During my time as an Assistant Methodologist at the ONS, I worked in the methodology 
department, and was responsible for the sample design and calculation of corrective 
weights for several major surveys. 

My work on sample design was to ensure that major national surveys were 
representative of the adult population, and my work calculating weights was to help 
produce more accurate population estimates and official statistics which the ONS was 
responsible for collecting. 

While I was at the ONS, I worked on several major projects, including the Census Non-
Response Linkage Study (CNRLS), which was a study that sought to identify and 
correct for those residents who took part in the compulsory Census, but tended not to 
opt-in to other types of survey conducted by the ONS. This is a set of skills and 
experience that I have taken forward, into the rest of my professional career. 

My time at the ONS gave me valuable skills, experience, and expertise in the designing 
of representative and accurate surveys, across a variety of modes of fieldwork and 
interview completion. 

Associate Lecturer, School of Management, Plymouth University (Sep 2009 – Jul 
2013) 

Research Assistant, The Elections Centre, Plymouth University (Mar 2012 – Apr 
2013) 

Membership of Professional Bodies 
Certified Member of the Market Research Society – No. 2201375 

20


--- Page 21 ---

The Market Research Society is the professional body and regulator of the market 
research industry in the UK. They promote the highest professional standards 
throughout the sector via the MRS Code of Conduct35. 

Certified membership is the higher professional grade of membership and recognises 
academic achievements and career experience of individuals in market research. It is 
awarded to senior market research practitioners who have progressed to a leadership 
level in research, insight, or analytics. Michael’s membership binds him to uphold the 
MRS Code of Conduct. 

Member of The Research Society 

The Research Society is the highest level of organisation in Australia for those engaged 
in market, social and opinion research. The Research Society regulates research 
professionals by compelling its members to adhere to the Code of Professional 
Behaviour36 that aligns with Australian Privacy requirements. 

The Code is intended to foster public confidence and to demonstrate practitioners' 
recognition of their ethical and professional responsibilities when carrying out research, 
and Michael’s membership binds him to comply with the Code in his professional 
activities. 

Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society (RSS) 

The Royal Statistical Society is a professional and learned society which, through its 
members, has an obligation in the public interest to provide the best possible statistical 
service and advice. 

Professional membership of the Society is an assurance of ability and integrity. Fellows 
are required to abide by the Code of Conduct37. In particular, they must: 

1)  Act in the public interest 
2)  Fulfil their obligations to employers and clients 
3)  Fulfil their obligations to the profession and the Society 
4)  Show professional competence and integrity at all times 

The Code is mandatory for all professionally qualified fellows, and it is recommended to 
all levels of fellow of the Society. 

35 https://www.mrs.org.uk/pdf/MRS-Code-of-Conduct-2019.pdf  
36 https://researchsociety.com.au/standards/code-of-professional-behaviour  
37 https://rss.org.uk/RSS/media/File-library/About/2019/RSS-Code-of-Conduct-2014.pdf  

21


--- Page 22 ---

Appendix 2 – Questionnaire 

ASK ALL 
1) Thank you for taking part in this survey. We hope you will find it interesting. 

The survey takes, on average, around 10 minutes to complete and we have allowed 
plenty of time for you to consider your responses carefully. 

Please note, your responses will be treated in the strictest confidence. We abide by 
the Market Research Society Code of Conduct, and your personal data will not be 
passed on to any third parties. 

If you agree for your survey response data to be used for market research purposes, 
please click the 'Yes' below to begin the survey. If you would rather that your 
responses are not used, then please select ‘No’. 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS FIXED POSITION] 

1)  Yes 
2)  No [SCREEN OUT] 

ASK ALL 
2) Which state or territory are you from? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS FIXED POSITION] 

1)  New South Wales 
2)  Victoria 
3)  Queensland 
4)  South Australia 
5)  Western Australia 
6)  Tasmania 
7)  Australian Capital Territory 
8)  Northern Territory 
9)  Other Commonwealth Territory [SCREEN OUT] 
10) Elsewhere [SCREEN OUT] 

ASK ALL 
3) And to ensure we have a representative sample; can you please enter your 
postcode in the box below? 
[OPEN TEXT RESPONSE] 

ASK ALL 
4) Are you eligible and enrolled to vote in Australian Federal and State Elections? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS FIXED POSITION] 

1)  Yes - I am enrolled to vote 
2)  No - I am not enrolled to vote [SCREEN OUT] 
3)  Unsure [SCREEN OUT] 
4)  Refused [SCREEN OUT] 

ASK ALL 
5) Please indicate your gender 

22


--- Page 23 ---

[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS FIXED POSITION] 

1)  Male 
2)  Female 
3)  Prefer not to say 
4)  Other (please specify): __________ 

ASK ALL 
6) Which age group do you fall into? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS FIXED POSITION] 

1)  17 or under [SCREEN OUT] 
2)  18 – 19 
3)  20 – 24 
4)  25 – 29 
5)  30 – 34 
6)  35 – 39 
7)  40 – 44 
8)  45 – 49 
9)  50 – 54 
10) 55 – 59 
11)  60 – 64 
12) 65 – 69 
13) 70 – 74 
14) 75+ 
15) Prefer not to say 

ASK ALL 
7) Which one of the following best describes your current employment situation? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS FIXED POSITION] 
1)  Employed full-time (more than 35 hours per week) 
2)  Employed part-time / casual (less than 35 hours per week) 
3)  Self Employed 
4)  Retired / Pensioner 
5)  Unemployed 
6)  Not in the Labour force 
7)  Home duties 
8)  Student 
9)  Other (please specify): _________ 

ASK ALL 
8) What is the highest level of education you have received? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS FIXED POSITION] 

1)  None - I have no qualifications 
2)  Certificate 1 or 2 
3)  Year 9 or below 
4)  Diploma 
5)  Certificate 3 or 4 
6)  Year 10 – 12 
7)  Bachelor’s degree 
8)  Master’s degree or higher 

23


--- Page 24 ---

9)  Other (please specify): __________ 

RANDOMLY ASSIGNED EITHER 9A, 9B, 9C OR 9D 
9a) If a Federal Election were held today, which party would you give your first 
preference vote to in the House of Representatives? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-15 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  Liberal Party [SHOW IN ALL OTHER THAN QLD + NT] 
2)  Liberal National Party [SHOW ONLY IN QLD] 
3)  Country Liberals [SHOW ONLY IN NT] 
4)  Australian Labor Party 
5)  The Greens 
6)  The Nationals [SHOW IN ALL OTHER THAN QLD + NT] 
7)  United Australia Party 
8)  An Independent Candidate 
9)  Pauline Hanson’s One Nation 
10) Animal Justice Party 
11)  Christian Democratic Party 
12) Katter's Australian Party 
13) Anning Conservative National 
14) Centre Alliance 
15) Shooters, Fishers and Farmers 
16) Other (please specify): __________ 
17) Unsure 
18) Refuse 

9b) If a Federal Election were held today, which party would you give your first 
preference vote to in the House of Representatives? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-15 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  Liberal Party [SHOW IN ALL OTHER THAN QLD + NT] 
2)  Liberal National Party [SHOW ONLY IN QLD] 
3)  Country Liberals [SHOW ONLY IN NT] 
4)  Australian Labor Party 
5)  The Greens 
6)  The Nationals [SHOW IN ALL OTHER THAN QLD + NT] 
7)  United Australia Party 
8)  An Independent Candidate 
9)  Pauline Hanson’s One Nation 
10) Animal Justice Party 
11)  Christian Democratic Party 
12) Katter's Australian Party 
13) Anning Conservative National 
14) Centre Alliance 
15) Shooters, Fishers and Farmers 
16) The New Liberals 
17) Other (please specify): __________ 
18) Unsure 
19) Refuse 

24


--- Page 25 ---

9c) If a Federal Election were held TODAY, which party would you give your first 
preference vote to in the House of Representatives? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 2-16 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  The New Liberals 
2)  Australian Labor Party 
3)  The Greens 
4)  The Nationals [SHOW IN ALL OTHER THAN QLD + NT] 
5)  United Australia Party 
6)  An Independent Candidate 
7)  Pauline Hanson’s One Nation 
8)  Animal Justice Party 
9)  Christian Democratic Party 
10) Katter's Australian Party 
11)  Anning Conservative National 
12) Centre Alliance 
13) Shooters, Fishers and Farmers 
14) Liberal Party [SHOW IN ALL OTHER THAN QLD + NT] 
15) Liberal National Party [SHOW ONLY IN QLD] 
16) Country Liberals [SHOW ONLY IN NT] 
17) Other (please specify): __________ 
18) Unsure 
19) Refuse 

9d) If a Federal Election were held TODAY, which party would you give your first 
preference vote to in the House of Representatives? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-13 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  The New Liberals 
2)  Australian Labor Party 
3)  The Greens 
4)  The Nationals [SHOW IN ALL OTHER THAN QLD + NT] 
5)  United Australia Party 
6)  An Independent Candidate 
7)  Pauline Hanson’s One Nation 
8)  Animal Justice Party 
9)  Christian Democratic Party 
10) Katter's Australian Party 
11)  Anning Conservative National 
12) Centre Alliance 
13) Shooters, Fishers and Farmers 
14) Other (please specify): __________ 
15) Unsure 
16) Refuse 

ASK ALL 
10) Under the preferential voting system, you must assign a preference to either the 
Liberal Party/LNP or the Australian Labor Party. Regardless of WHERE you would 
place them in your preference list, would you put the Liberal Party/LNP ahead of the 
Labor Party or the Labor Party ahead of the Liberal Party/LNP? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-4 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

25


--- Page 26 ---

1)  Liberal Party [SHOW IN ALL OTHER THAN QLD + NT] 
2)  Liberal National Party [SHOW ONLY IN QLD]  
3)  Country Liberal [SHOW ONLY IN NT] 
4)  Australian Labor Party 
5)  Unsure 
6)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
11) The New Liberals may stand a candidate in your area at the next Federal election. 
From the list below, who do you think the current leader of the New Liberals is? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-7 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  Victor Kline 
2)  Scott Morrison 
3)  Anthony Albanese 
4)  Adam Bandt 
5)  Michael McCormack 
6)  Pauline Hanson 
7)  Clive Palmer 
8)  Other (please specify): __________ 
9)  Unsure 
10) Refused 

ASK ALL 
12) From the list of options below, please select the parties that you think form part 
of the Liberal-National Coalition, commonly known as the Coalition? 

Please select all those options that you feel apply 
[MULTI CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-11 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  The Liberals 
2)  The LNP 
3)  The Nationals 
4)  The Country Liberals 
5)  The New Liberals 
6)  Labor 
7)  The Greens 
8)  Pauline Hanson’s One Nation 
9)  United Australia party 
10) Katter's Australian party 
11)  Shooters Fishers and Farmers 
12) Unsure 
13) Refused 

ASK ALL 
13) Below is a list of political parties. 

From the list below, please select those that you feel are connected, or have an 
existing relationship with the Liberal Party? 

Please select all that apply 

26


--- Page 27 ---

[MULTI CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-11 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  The Liberal National Party 
2)  The Country Liberal Party 
3)  The National Party 
4)  The New Liberals 
5)  The Australian Labor Party 
6)  The Green Party 
7)  Pauline Hanson’s One Nation 
8)  The New Progressives 
9)  The Green Progressives 
10) None 
11)  Unsure 
12) Refused 

ASK ALL 
14) Do you think the Liberal Party and The New Liberals are both part of the same 
party or different parties? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-2 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  Different parties 
2)  The same party 
3)  Unsure 
4)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
15) As far as you are aware, does a relationship exist between the Liberal Party and 
the New Liberals? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-2 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  They have no existing relationship 
2)  They have an existing relationship 
3)  Something else 
4)  Unsure 
5)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
16) If a party standing at a Federal election, had the word ‘New’ in front of an existing 
name in party politics (for example, New Labor, New Liberals, New Greens); in your 
view, which of the following options best represents who the party is? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-5 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  A new political party entirely separate to existing parties with no relationship to 

them 

2)  A separate party but has a connection or relationship with them 
3)  A national rebrand of an existing political party 
4)  Localised branding of an existing party 
5)  A separate division within an existing party 
6)  Other (please specify): __________ 
7)  Unsure 
8)  Refused 

27


--- Page 28 ---

ASK ALL 
17) The New Liberals may stand a candidate in your area at the next Federal election. 
From what you know, which of the following options best represents who you think 
the New Liberals are? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-5 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  A new party entirely separate to the Liberal Party with no relationship to them 
2)  A separate party from the Liberal Party but has a connection or relationship with 

them 

3)  A national rebrand of the Liberal Party 
4)  Localised branding of the Liberal Party 
5)  A separate division within the Liberal Party 
6)  Other (please specify): __________ 
7)  Unsure 
8)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
18) Which of the following is closest to your view? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-2 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  The name ‘The New Liberals’ sounds like it is a completely separate organisation 

from the 'Liberal Party' with no connection or relationship 

2)  The name ‘The New Liberals’ sounds like it is a rebrand of the 'Liberal Party', with 

slightly changed priorities 
3)  Something else: ___________ 
4)  Unsure 
5)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
19) Which of the following is closest to your view? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-2 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  The name ‘The New Liberals’ sounds like it is a completely separate organisation 

from the ‘Liberal Party’ with no connection or relationship 

2)  The name ‘The New Liberals’ sounds like it is a division within the ‘Liberal Party’ 
3)  Something else: ___________ 
4)  Unsure 
5)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
20) Which of the following is closest to your view? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-2 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  The name ‘The New Liberals’ sounds like it is a completely separate organisation 

from the ‘Liberal Party’ with no connection or relationship 

2)  The name ‘The New Liberals’ sounds like it is a new and fresh party that is 

separate from the ‘Liberal Party’ but is connected and works closely with them 

3)  Something else: ___________ 
4)  Unsure 
5)  Refused 

ASK ALL 

28


--- Page 29 ---

21) Which of the following is closest to your view? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-2 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 
1)  The name ‘The New Liberals’ sounds like it is completely separate from the 

‘Liberal Party’ 

2)  The name ‘The New Liberals’ sounds like it is connected in some way to the 

‘Liberal Party’ 

3)  Something else: ___________  
4)  Unsure 
5)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
22) Do you think that placing the term ‘New’ in front of an existing party name is 
sufficient for voters to fully understand that this party has no relationship with an 
existing party? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-2 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  Yes – it is sufficient 
2)  No – it is not sufficient 
3)  Unsure 
4)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
23) Do you think that placing the term ‘New’ in front of an existing party name is 
sufficient for voters to fully understand that this party is a completely separate 
entity from an existing political party? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-2 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  Yes – it is sufficient 
2)  No – it is not sufficient 
3)  Unsure 
4)  Refused 

ASK THOSE WHO SELECTED ‘THE NEW LIBERALS’ AT 9A, 9B, 9C OR 9D. 
24) Earlier you said that you would most likely vote for The New Liberals. 

The New Liberals are a new political party led by Victor Kline, which is seeking 
registration, with no connection or relationship to the Liberal Party currently in 
government. 

Having been given this information, can you confirm that you intended to vote for 
The New Liberals earlier, or did you intend to vote for another party? 

I meant to vote for... 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 2-8 IN RANDOM POSITION, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  The New Liberals, led by Victor Kline, currently seeking registration 
2)  The Liberal Party, currently led by Scott Morrison, currently in government and 

established in 1944 

3)  The Liberal National Party of Queensland, established in 2008 
4)  The Country Liberal Party, established in 1974 

29


--- Page 30 ---

5)  The Australian Labor Party, currently led by Anthony Albanese, currently in 

opposition and established in 1901 

6)  The Australian Greens, currently led by Adam Bandt, established in 1992 
7)  Pauline Hanson’s One Nation Party, led by Pauline Hanson, established in 1997 
8)  The National Party, led by Michael McCormack, established in 1920 
9)  Other (please specify): __________ 
10) Unsure 
11)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
25) If they were on the same ballot paper, would you find it clear or confusing, to 
correctly identify the party you wish to vote for when choosing between ‘The New 
Liberals’ or the ‘Liberals’? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS 1-4 RANDOMLY FLIP, ELSE FIXED] 

1)  Very confusing 
2)  Fairly confusing 
3)  Fairly clear 
4)  Very clear 
5)  Unsure 
6)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
26) Can you say whether you agree, or disagree with the following statements? 
[SINGLE CODE, RANDOM POSITION OF STATEMENTS A-F] 

Statement  Text 

A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

The names ‘Liberal’ and ‘The New Liberals’ very clearly tell me that they 
are entirely separate organisations from one another 

The Liberal Party and The New Liberals have names that are too similar 
for me to be sure who I am voting for 

It sounds like there is no difference between the Liberal Party and The 
New Liberals 

By voting for The New Liberals, I am helping to elect a Liberal 
government 

A vote for The New Liberals goes to the Liberal Party 

‘The New Liberals’ and ‘Liberal Party’ sound like they have an existing 
relationship and are connected to one another in some way 

[RESPONSE OPTIONS, SCALE RANDOMLY FLIP 1-5] 

1)  Strongly agree 
2)  Somewhat agree 

30


--- Page 31 ---

3)  Neither agree, nor disagree 
4)  Somewhat disagree 
5)  Strongly disagree 
6)  Unsure 
7)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
27) Can you say whether you agree, or disagree with the following statements? 
[SINGLE CODE, RANDOM POSITION OF STATEMENTS A-E] 

Statement  Text 

A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

If both a 'New Liberals' candidate, and a 'Liberal' candidate stood in my 
electorate, I might feel confused about which party to preference above 
the other 

The Liberals and The New Liberals sound very similar to me 

If candidates from both the Liberals and The New Liberals stood in my 
electorate at the next election, I would find the voting experience much 
more difficult 

The New Liberals is just a marketing exercise from the Liberals to get 
more votes 

If a Party uses the name The New Liberals, it will confuse voters into 
voting for a party they do not intend to vote for 

[RESPONSE OPTIONS, SCALE RANDOMLY FLIP 1-5] 

1)  Strongly agree 
2)  Somewhat agree 
3)  Neither agree, nor disagree 
4)  Somewhat disagree 
5)  Strongly disagree 
6)  Unsure 
7)  Refused 

ASK ALL 
28) Thinking back to the 2019 Federal Election, who did you vote for in the house of 
representatives? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS FIXED POSITION] 

1)  Liberal Party or LNP or Country Liberals 
2)  Labor Party 
3)  Greens Party 
4)  National Party [SHOW IN ALL OTHER THAN QLD + NT] 
5)  Pauline Hanson's One Nation Party 
6)  United Australia Party 
7)  An independent 

31


--- Page 32 ---

8)  Other (please specify): __________ 
9)  Unsure 
10) Refused 
11)  I did not vote 

ASK ALL 
29) Which of the following best describes your living situation? 
[SINGLE CODE, RESPONSE OPTIONS FIXED POSITION] 

1)  Own home with a mortgage 
2)  Own home outright 
3)  Private Renting 
4)  Social Housing 
5)  Other (please specify): __________ 
6)  Refused 

32


--- Page 33 ---




--- Page 34 ---

Appendix 4 – Sample House of Representatives Ballot 
Paper 

Figure 1: Sample House of Representatives Ballot Paper 

This is a sample ballot paper taken from the Australian Electoral Commission’s 
website38. Please note that on the ballot paper, candidate and therefore party names, 
are placed in a column, with positions being determined by random lot39. It demonstrates 
that there can be substantial distance between candidate and party names. 

38 https://www.aec.gov.au/Voting/How_to_vote/practice/practice-house-of-reps.htm 
39 
https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pu
bs/rp/RP0708/08rp05#preferential 

34


--- Page 35 ---




--- Page 36 ---




--- Page 37 ---




--- Page 38 ---




--- Page 39 ---




--- Page 40 ---




--- Page 41 ---




--- Page 42 ---




--- Page 43 ---




--- Page 44 ---




--- Page 45 ---




--- Page 46 ---




--- Page 47 ---




--- Page 48 ---




--- Page 49 ---




--- Page 50 ---




--- Page 51 ---

Appendix 6 – Research Report 

51


--- Page 52 ---

52


--- Page 53 ---

53


--- Page 54 ---

54


--- Page 55 ---

55


--- Page 56 ---

56


--- Page 57 ---

57


--- Page 58 ---

58


--- Page 59 ---

59


--- Page 60 ---

60


--- Page 61 ---

61


--- Page 62 ---

62


--- Page 63 ---

63


--- Page 64 ---

64


--- Page 65 ---

65


--- Page 66 ---

66


--- Page 67 ---

67


--- Page 68 ---

68


--- Page 69 ---

69


--- Page 70 ---

70


--- Page 71 ---

71


--- Page 72 ---

72


--- Page 73 ---

73


--- Page 74 ---

74


--- Page 75 ---

75


--- Page 76 ---

76


--- Page 77 ---

77


--- Page 78 ---

78


--- Page 79 ---

79


--- Page 80 ---

80


--- Page 81 ---

81


--- Page 82 ---

82


--- Page 83 ---

83


--- Page 84 ---

84


--- Page 85 ---

85


--- Page 86 ---




--- Page 87 ---




--- Page 88 ---

88


--- Page 89 ---

89


--- Page 90 ---




--- Page 91 ---

91


--- Page 92 ---




--- Page 93 ---

93


--- Page 94 ---

94


--- Page 95 ---

95


--- Page 96 ---

96


--- Page 97 ---

97


--- Page 98 ---

98


--- Page 99 ---

99


--- Page 100 ---

100


--- Page 101 ---

101


--- Page 102 ---

102


--- Page 103 ---

103


--- Page 104 ---

104


--- Page 105 ---

105


--- Page 106 ---

106


--- Page 107 ---

107


--- Page 108 ---

108


--- Page 109 ---

109


--- Page 110 ---

110