

--- Page 1 ---

Version 01 06 April 2016

Nomination 
Guide for 
Candidates
Federal  
Parliamentary  
Elections


--- Page 2 ---

If you’re thinking about standing as a candidate for the 
Commonwealth Parliament, this pamphlet outlines the 
steps you will need to take when nominating for the 
Senate or the House of Representatives.

The information in this pamphlet is current as at April 2016 and outlines the following:

Step 1:  Determine your eligibility

Step 2:  Complete appropriate nomination form(s)

Step 3:  Arrange your nomination deposit

Step 4:  Decide whether you want to appoint an agent

Step 5:  Lodge your nomination, deposit and agent 

appointment form

Nomination Guide for Candidates 

2


--- Page 3 ---

Step 1: Determine 
your eligibility

To nominate for either the Senate or the House 
of Representatives, you must be:

 ■ at least 18 years old;

 ■ an Australian citizen; and

 ■ either enrolled or eligible to be enrolled on the 

Commonwealth electoral roll.

You cannot nominate for the Senate or the 
House of Representatives if you are: 

 ■ currently a member of a state parliament or 
territory legislative assembly and have not 
resigned before the hour of nomination;

 ■ disqualified by section 44 of the Constitution. 

See Electoral Backgrounder on Constitutional 
Disqualifications and Intending Candidates 
available at www.aec.gov.au.

Step 2: Complete 
nomination forms 

There are several different options when 
nominating for the Senate or the House of 
Representatives, each option using a different 
nomination form.

You need to complete the nomination form for the 
relevant option, as well as an individual candidate 
details form for each candidate nominated.

Note: for elections held on the same day, you 
can only nominate once for the Senate in only 
one state or territory, or once for only one House 
of Representatives division. If you nominate more 
than once, all your nominations will be invalid.

A registered party may not nominate more 
than one candidate for a single House of 
Representatives division in a state or territory.

Individual candidate 
details forms
On either Form 59 ‘Nomination of a Senator’ or 
Form 60 ‘Nomination of a Member of the House 
of Representatives’ you must provide:

 ■ your name;

 ■ your place of residence (unless you are 
registered as a ‘silent’ elector on the 
electoral roll);

 ■ your occupation;

 ■ your contact details (you can request that 

these are not publicly released);

 ■ whether you have been endorsed by a 

registered political party; and

 ■ if you are nominating for the Senate you can 

request that your name be included in a group 
of candidates on the ballot paper.

You must nominate using the name under which 
you are enrolled or entitled to be enrolled.

Nomination forms, including your contact details, 
become publicly available after the declaration of 
nominations.

If you are a ‘silent’ elector, you are not required to 
write your address on the nomination form, but 
you must provide a correspondence address. 
This address may be a postal address and is not 
made publicly available.

You must sign a declaration on the nomination 
form that you:

 ■ are an Australian citizen;

 ■ are at least 18 years of age;

 ■ are an elector or qualified to be an elector;

 ■ are qualified to be elected under the 
Constitution and other laws of the 
Commonwealth;

 ■ are not, and do not intend to be, a candidate 
in any other Commonwealth election on the 
same day; and

 ■ consent to act if elected.

Nomination Guide for Candidates 

3


--- Page 4 ---

Senate forms

There are five types of nomination forms available for the Senate:

FORM

USE

Form 59a 
Multiple party group nomination 
by registered officer

This form should be used where two or more candidates for the Senate 
are nominated as a group endorsed by multiple registered parties and are 
nominated by the parties’ registered officers.

Form 59b 
Group nomination by registered 
officer

This form should be used where two or more candidates are nominated 
as a group by the registered officer of one registered political party.

Form 59c
Unendorsed group nomination

This form should be used where two or more unendorsed candidates for 
the Senate are nominated as a group.

Form 59d
Single nomination by registered 
officer

Form 59e
Single nomination of unendorsed 
candidate or incumbent 
independent

This form should be used where an individual candidate is nominated as a 
single candidate by the registered officer of a registered political party.

This form should be used where an unendorsed candidate for the Senate 
is nominated by 100 eligible electors or where an incumbent independent 
candidate for the Senate is nominated by one eligible elector.

Note: Each nomination must include one of the above forms plus a Form 59 ‘Nomination of a Senator’ 
for each candidate nominated. Unendorsed candidates who wish to form a group must complete Form 
59 and Form 59e for each candidate nominated as well as Form 59c for the group nomination.

House of Representatives forms

There are three types of nomination forms available for House of Representatives candidates:

FORM

USE

Form 60a
Bulk nomination – endorsed 
candidate

This form should be used where a registered political party nominates all 
its House of Representatives candidates in a particular State or Territory at 
the one time.

Form 60b
Single nomination – endorsed 
candidate

This form should be used where an individual candidate for the House of 
Representatives is endorsed by a registered political party and nominated 
by the registered officer of the political party.

Form 60c 
Single nomination of unendorsed 
candidate or incumbent 
independent

This form should be used where an unendorsed candidate for the House 
of Representatives is nominated by 100 eligible electors or where an 
incumbent independent candidate for the House of Representatives is 
nominated by one eligible elector.

Note: Each nomination must include one of the above forms plus a Form 60 ‘Nomination of a Member of 
the House of Representatives’ for each candidate nominated.

Nomination Guide for Candidates 

4


--- Page 5 ---

Step 3: Arrange your 
nomination deposit 

Your nomination must be accompanied by a 
deposit paid in cash, or by a cheque drawn 
by a bank or other financial institution on itself 
(cheques drawn by credit unions on banks 
are not acceptable). Cheques for nomination 
deposits should be made out to the Australian 
Electoral Commission. Money orders, electronic 
funds transfers, credit cards, personal cheques 
or other business cheques cannot be accepted.

A deposit is required for each individual 
candidate. The deposit required is $2 000 for 
each nominated Senate candidate and $1 000 
for each nominated House of Representatives 
candidate. 

Refund of deposit 
The deposit will be returned to the person who 
paid the amount, or someone authorised by that 
person in writing, if the candidate is elected or 
receives at least four per cent of the formal first 
preference votes, or is part of a Senate group 
that receives at least four percent of the formal 
first preference votes.

All unsuccessful candidates not meeting these 
criteria forfeit their deposit.

For further details, see the Candidates Handbook 
available from the AEC website or an AEC office 
or by calling 13 23 26.

Support for your nomination 
If you are endorsed by a registered political 
party, the nomination should include verification 
of your endorsement by the registered officer or 
deputy registered officer of the party.

If you are not nominated by a registered political 
party, your nomination must be supported 
by 100 eligible electors who are entitled to 
vote in the election in the state or territory (for 
Senate candidates) or the division (for House 
of Representatives candidates) for which you 
are nominating. 

If you are a Senator or a member of the House 
of Representatives who was elected as an 
unendorsed candidate at the previous election, 
your nomination must be supported by one 
elector (other than the candidate) entitled to 
vote at the election in the state or territory (for 
Senate candidates) or the division (for House 
of Representatives candidates) for which you 
are nominating.

If a nomination is endorsed by a registered 
political party and the party endorsing a 
candidate for the election has a logo entered 
in the Register of Political Parties at the time 
of nomination, the registered officer/deputy 
registered officer of that party may request, as 
part of the nomination process, to have the logo 
printed adjacent to the candidate’s name on a 
House of Representatives ballot paper, or printed 
adjacent to the party name above the line on 
the Senate ballot paper. Where candidates in a 
Senate group have been endorsed by more than 
one political party, no more than two party logos 
may be printed on the ballot paper. 

Nomination forms can be obtained from the 
AEC website, by visiting an AEC office, or 
calling 13 23 26.

For help filling out a nomination form, please 
see the sample nomination forms on the AEC 
website. These have been developed to assist 
candidates and parties with this process.

Nomination Guide for Candidates 

5


--- Page 6 ---

Step 5: Lodge your 
nomination and deposit 

Where to nominate 
If you are nominating for the Senate for a state 
or territory, your nomination and deposit must 
be lodged at the office of the Australian Electoral 
Officer (AEO) for that state or territory.

If you are nominating for the House of 
Representatives for a federal division your 
nomination and deposit must be lodged at the 
office of the Divisional Returning Officer (DRO) 
for that division.

If you are included in a bulk House of 
Representatives nomination (where a registered 
political party nominates all its House of 
Representatives candidates for a particular state 
or territory at one time), the bulk nominations 
must be lodged at the office of the AEO for that 
state or territory.

You may post or fax your nomination form, 
however:

 ■ the nomination must be physically received by 
the office of the relevant AEO or DRO before 
the relevant deadline

 ■ by faxing the form, you must agree the time 

of receipt is the time when the form enters the 
AEC’s fax machine memory

 ■ the AEC is not responsible for any deadlines 

missed or losses incurred

 ■ your deposit must be received by the relevant 

deadline. 

Step 4: Decide whether 
you want to appoint a 
candidate agent 

All candidates, including candidates who are 
members of a Senate group, have financial 
disclosure responsibilities. 

Candidates and Senate groups may appoint 
an agent to act on their behalf with regards to 
election financial disclosure matters. Candidates 
who do not appoint agents become their own 
agents and are responsible for lodging their own 
returns. The first listed candidate in a Senate 
group is responsible for lodging the group’s return 
if an agent has not been appointed for the group. 

In addition to financial disclosure responsibilities, 
the agents of independent candidates and 
Senate groups (i.e. candidates not endorsed by 
political parties) are the persons to whom any 
election funding entitlements will be paid.

To appoint an agent, you must complete an 
Agent appointment form and ensure that it 
is received by the AEC’s National Office in 
Canberra before the close of nominations. An 
appointment is valid for a single election only.

Appoint Candidate Agent and Appoint Senate 
Group Agent forms are available from the 
AEC website.

Note that an agent of a party is not automatically 
a candidate’s agent unless specifically appointed 
by the candidate for the election. The exception 
to this is for a Senate group where all the 
members of the group have been endorsed by 
the same registered political party, then the party 
agent is responsible for meeting the disclosure 
obligation of the group in the annual disclosures 
submitted for that political party.

Further information on appointing an agent is 
available in the Financial Disclosure Guide for 
Candidates and Senate Groups published on 
the AEC website.

Nomination Guide for Candidates 

6


--- Page 7 ---

Where to get more 
information

Further information is available in the Candidates 
Handbook and from AEC offices, or by phoning  
13 23 26. Specific information on filling out a 
nomination form is available at the AEC website 
where sample nomination forms are provided.

The AEC conducts candidate briefing sessions 
nationally for interested persons. Your DRO or 
AEO can provide you with information on when 
and where these sessions will be conducted. 

All prospective candidates are encouraged to 
attend these sessions. Further information can 
be obtained by contacting the AEC on 13 23 26.

As requirements may change between elections, 
intending candidates should ensure that they 
have the latest information available before 
submitting their nomination. Updated versions 
of the relevant forms and this guide will be 
placed on the AEC website as required or upon 
announcement of an election.

When to nominate 
Please note: Forms cannot be lodged with the 
appropriate officer until after the election date 
has been announced and the writs for the 
election have been issued.

You can nominate as a candidate during AEC 
business hours any time after the writ is issued 
up to 12 noon on the day nominations close.

House of Representatives bulk nominations must 
be lodged with the relevant AEO not less than 48 
hours before the close of nominations.

For a nomination to be valid, both the nomination 
form and the nomination deposit must be in the 
hands of the AEO or DRO by the relevant deadline.

It is your responsibility to ensure that all nomination 
requirements are met and that the AEC has 
received your nomination by the deadline.

Late nominations cannot be accepted under any 
circumstances.

Withdrawal of nomination 
You can withdraw your consent to a nomination 
up until the hour of nomination by lodging a 
withdrawal notice, but not after nominations 
have closed.

Legal advice
The AEC can help by supplying you with 
general information about the nomination 
process. As a prospective candidate, you 
must satisfy yourself about your legal position. 
You can refer to the provisions of either the 
Constitution or the Commonwealth Electoral 
Act 1918; however you should also consider 
obtaining your own legal advice. 

Please note the AEC cannot provide you with 
legal advice.

Nomination Guide for Candidates 

7