

--- Page 1 ---

AEC.0002.0001.7059

 The Hon. Michael McCormack MP Minister for Small Business Federal Member for Riverina  Dr Andrew Laming MP Federal Member for Bowman  MEDIA RELEASE ENDS  Media Contacts:  McCormack – Dom Hopkinson 0428 373 122 Laming – Penny Donald – 0410 556 760 13 April 2017  BOON FOR BOWMAN’S SMALL BUSINESSES   FEDERAL Member for Bowman Andrew Laming hosted Minister for Small Business Michael McCormack in Cleveland today holding a roundtable with local small businesspeople and community leaders.   “I am pleased the Minister accepted my invitation to visit Bowman and to meet local businesspeople to discuss how the Government’s small business plan will help them grow and create local jobs,” Dr Laming said.   “Today, we discussed cuts to small business taxes and the instant asset write off programme which the Government has delivered to free-up resources for small businesses to reinvest and grow.   “We also discussed new trade opportunities and export markets small businesses can tap into following the Government’s successful negotiation of trade agreements with South Korea, Japan and China.   “Small businesspeople were also interested to hear about the Government’s changes to competition policy and new laws we have introduced to ensure multinationals pay their fair share of tax – all of which are levelling the playing field for small businesses to compete on their merits.”  Minister McCormack said the Government’s small business plan was a centre-piece for economic growth and job creation.   “The Government’s small business plan is focused on driving economic growth in local communities and in the national economy,” Mr McCormack said.   “Small businesses employ more than five and a half million Australians and contribute more than $380 billion in GDP every year, making it a vital sector in our economy.   “It is great to be here today with Andrew Laming to discuss how the Government’s cuts to small business taxes will help grow the local economy, grow local businesses and grow local opportunities, including new job opportunities.    “Our plan is all about taking the pressure off small business – the local job creators – so they can get on with running and growing their businesses.”    You can find out more by searching ‘small business’ or visiting www.business.gov.au/smallbusiness.