

--- Page 1 ---

National Induction Program 
Program outline 

Introduction 

The National Training and Education Unit (NTEU) has developed a National Induction Program (the 
program) that is designed to ensure that staff who are new to the agency or gain a promotion at an 
identified level, receive a nationally consistent induction to the AEC. The program is designed to set 
clear expectations regarding the roles and responsibilities of Participants and the agency, and it will 
guide the performance and professional development of all staff, laying the foundations of the AEC’s 
working environment, agency values and agency expectations. 

Learning outcomes 

By the end of the program Participants will be able to: 

1.  Behave in accordance with the AEC values and commitments, and describe why they 

underpin the work of the AEC. 

2.  Make decisions and demonstrate behaviours that represent the APS values and comply with 

the APS Code of Conduct. 

3.  Promote and contribute to a positive organisational culture based on quality, agility and 

professionalism. 

4.  Apply learning to role that is compliant with policies, procedures and legislation relevant to the 

AEC. 

5.  Recognise the importance of transparency in the AEC and its impact on reputation and public 

perception. 

6.  Identify how their role contributes to AEC business outcomes and agency objectives. 
7.  Identify the internal and external factors of the AEC’s environment and consider them when 

performing their role. 

8.  Explain the role of Parliament, the role the AEC plays in its formation and the importance of 

political neutrality. 

9.  Explain the guiding principles of electoral management and the three levels of government in 

Australia.


--- Page 2 ---

Program Design 

The program is split across three (3) phases with modules and resources provided to support each 
phase. The program is designed to be delivered to a Participant over a period of five months and will 
commence from two weeks prior to starting their role. 

Phase 

Timing 

Outcome 

Phase 1 – Pre-commencement 

Module 1 

From 2 weeks prior to 
commencement 

Phase 2 – Development 

Day 1 – 5 months 

Modules 2 – 8 

Modules 10a or 10b 

Phase 3 – Follow up 

Day 1 – 5 months 

Modules 2 – 8 

Modules 10a or 10b  

Review 

Module 9 

6 months 

The Participant will have actioned all 
necessary recruitment activities and have an 
understanding of the agency’s role and 
expectations of staff and self. 

The Line Manager has completed required 
activities to ensure smooth transition on Day 
one.  

The Participant and identified key staff 
involved in program delivery have successfully 
understood and participated in assigned 
induction modules, including on the job 
training, and are confident that future activities 
will be actioned in accordance with the AEC 
values and expectations. 

The Participant and the Line Manager have 
had meaningful discussion at all ‘Check-in 
Points’ throughout the program. 

The Line Manager and Executive Level Officer 
are confident that the programs overall 
learning outcomes have been met. 

Observation of learning in action continues. 
Feedback has been provided to the NTEU for 
further program development and updates.  

Participation 

The Participant group for the program will be staff that gain an ongoing or non-ongoing role within the 
AEC at the following levels: 

  APS2-APS6 

  Executive Level (EL) 

  Senior Executive Services (SES) 

Where AEC staff gain promotion, they will not be required to participate in the full program, but 
should review the modules in consultation with their manager, and undertake identified compulsory 
activities e.g. the AEC Foundation Programs. 

For staff who gain a non-ongoing role within the AEC, they will be required to participate in the 
program up until the point in which their contract expires. If a staff member leaves the AEC at the 
conclusion of their contract and then returns within a six month period, they will be expected to 
continue working through the program until it is completed.


--- Page 3 ---

The Program will require the identification of the following staff to support program delivery: 

  Line Manager - the responsible officer that will conduct the induction locally and either 

undertake or delegate induction activities. The Line Manager will also be responsible for 
providing feedback on performance. 

  Local Induction Adviser - will help the Participant settle in and act as their primary contact on 

general enquiries and day to day operational issues. 

  Executive Level Officer – through consultation with the Line Manager, they will ensure that 
expectations of the program are being met, that mandatory training is being completed and 
that the Participant is fit for the organisation prior to the probation period end date (where 
applicable). 

  Local Trainers - taken from the AEC’s assessed trainer pool, they may be responsible for 

delivery of face to face session content for Participants in their office/state/branch or in other 
locations, where required. 

  NTEU – will deliver face to face sessions to Participants in Canberra, including any relevant 

delivery to National Office branches.  

Roles and responsibilities for identified staff are clearly outlined in the resources developed for the 
program. 

Curriculum 

The program is designed to provide the Participant with consistent guidance and an understanding of 
the agency’s values, expected behaviours, corporate and operating environment, agency direction 
and purpose. 

Specific information on the Participant’s job role, will be driven by their level and area of the 
organisation, and is accounted for under a capability framework and specific job role requirements. 
These critical infrastructure pieces are being developed in parallel to the induction program. 

A set curriculum has been developed for the program outlining subject matter and staff involvement. 
The curriculum provides visibility to all staff involved in the program about what will be discussed 
throughout the five months. 

The program aligns with other AEC timeframes and requirements including the development of 
Individual Performance Plans (IPPs), probationary reporting and the completion of mandatory 
training. The program will direct the Participant and the Line Manager to the existing resources 
available in these areas. 

The curriculum features a two day AEC Foundation Program – National Experience in Canberra for 
those staff at the APS6 – SES level and a one day Network Experience conducted in the states for 
those staff at the APS2 – APS5 level. These programs are designed to support the Participant in 
meeting the learning outcomes and provide an opportunity for the Participant to build their peer 
networks. Programs will be conducted twice annually with some travel required for identified staff. 

NOTE: As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the inaugural programs will be delivered as a virtual 
facilitator led experience. The AEC Foundation Program – National Experience will be held virtually 
over a two week period, and the Network Experience will be held virtually over a one week period. 
Once COVID-19 restrictions are eased, the AEC will review the Foundation Programs. 

See Attachment A for an overview of the program curriculum. 

Resources 

A series of induction modules have been developed by the NTEU to ensure that delivery of the 
program is nationally consistent, professional and in line with the curriculum and learning outcomes.


--- Page 4 ---

Modules are available to identified staff through a dedicated National Induction Program SharePoint 
page located on the Learning Hub. Through the Learning Hub staff will be able to access the 
following materials: 

  Manager Guides - each module will feature a Manager Guide that will provide the Line 

Manager and the Local Induction Adviser with information and resources to support topics 
being discussed and undertaken at that time. 

  Checklists – each module will have a Checklist that will work in conjunction with the Manager 

Guide to ensure that Line Managers, the Local Induction Adviser and the Participant 
undertake their required actions. 

  Participant Guides – identified modules will feature a Participant Guide that will provide the 

Participant with additional reading and required actions to support their learning. 

  Resources – each module will have assigned resources including scenarios, case studies, 
templates and activities to support the delivery of the program and ensure consistency. 

 

 

Induction eLearning course – an induction eLearning course has been developed allowing the 
Participant to gain an initial understanding of the AEC’s working environment, including the 
AEC values and expectations. 

Induction videos – a series of short videos have been recorded by members of the Executive 
Leadership Team introducing themselves, welcoming the Participant to the agency and 
promoting specific key information e.g. the AEC Corporate Plan, strategic direction and their 
expectations of staff. 

Additional program resources including staff roles and responsibilities have been developed, as well 
as facilitator guides and facilitator resources for the AEC Foundation Program – National and 
Network Experience. 

Consultation 

The NTEU reviewed current AEC content against the program objectives, identifying gaps in 
resources and engaging with business owners in content development. The NTEU designed and 
developed materials to support the program, and business owners were consulted and reviewed all 
module content and eLearning as required. 

The Learning and Development Community of Practice supported the program through testing, which 
ensured the program was fit for purpose and user friendly. 

Feedback has been discussed throughout the consultation phase and changes have been made to 
the program as required. 

All identified staff who participate in the program are required to provide feedback and undertake an 
evaluation of the program upon completion of each module.