

--- Page 1 ---




--- Page 2 ---

25th March 2021 

Commission Secretariat 
Australian Electoral Commissioner, 
Locked Bag 4007, 
CANBERRA 
ACT 2601 
commission.secretariat@aec.gov.au 
AEC 02 6271 4552 

Request to provide further material in support of reasons  already supplied for 
making an Application for Internal Review 

 of decision to Deregister 

the SENIORS UNITED PARTY OF AUSTRALIA 

under s 141(2) of the Electoral Act 

Dear Sir / Madam, 

I have given the following details in my Application for a Review which has already been received 
by the Australian Electoral Commission. 

 and I am the applicant for this review. I am a person affected   
My name is 
by, and dissatisfied with, the decision by the Australian Electoral Commission to deregister the 
 Seniors United Party of Australia, ( SUPA).  

consider the reasons below which I feel give a strong argument for the AEC to set aside the 
decision under review and make a decision in substitution for the decision set aside. That is, to 
 reregister the party. 

 I ask you to please 

The two reasons I wish to add for the AEC to consider are:- 

OTHER DEMOGRAPHIC  REASONS 

Because of the demographic which the party attempts to represent, that is over 60 years of age, our 
mainly elderly membership is largely made up of aged pensioners, or part pensions. 

4.  Being a pensioner, or part pensioner usually implies that you pay no income tax. Paying no 
      income tax means that any donation given to the Seniors United party by party members 
      who are pensioners can not be claimed on income tax because they have no income tax to 

Out of scopeOut of scopeOut of scopeOut of scope


--- Page 3 ---

pay. The result of this is that the party’s income from donations is sharply reduced compared to 
     most, if not every other political party  (There is no other funding besides donations). This lack 
     of funds is a hug disadvantage for the party as there is little to no funds for communicating by 
     mail to many members let alone advertising, and there is no possibility of employing people to 
     carry what might be regarded as office work. 

     Other parties, especially the major parties receive many large donations most of which would be 
      claimed back through tax by the donor. 

5.  An additional disadvantage of having a large part of the membership being pensioners or part 
     pensioners is that they individually normally do not have financial funds to be able to afford 
     to be political candidates at elections hence there are difficulties finding candidates with life 
     experiences of being a pensioner in a financial position to stand as a candidate 

REQUEST 

I wish these two additional reasons please be be included with the initial reasons and   I 
respectfully ask the AEC Commission to please consider all my reasons and set aside the failed 
decision for the Seniors United Party of Australia and substitute it with a pass decision. 

Thanking you for this review. 

Yours Faithfully, 

Out of scope