

--- Page 1 ---

Document No 30

AEC reference: LEX1984 

By email: 

Dear 

Request for review of decision under s 141 of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 

1.

2.

The Australian Electoral Commission (‘the Commission’) refers to your email dated
6 May 2022, in which you requested that the Commission review the delegate’s
decision to deregister VOTEFLUX.ORG | Upgrade Democracy! (VFUD) under
section 137(6) of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (‘Electoral Act’).

This letter is to notify you that the Commission has decided that it is unable to review
the delegate’s decision at your request.

Your application 

3.

4.

5.

On 6 May 2022, the Commission Secretariat received an email from you, requesting
a review of the delegate’s decision to deregister VFUD under section 137(6) of the
Electoral Act (‘delegate’s decision’).

In your email, you stated that you were linked to an article on VFUD’s website “via
one of their communication channels: https://www.voteflux.org/2022/04/20/wrongful-
deregistration/” and agreed with the reasoning in that article for VFUD’s belief that
“their deregistration was unfair/unjust”. You also stated that “there is no reason not to
poll the list of active memberships extensively to reach the firmest result” and that
VFUD “pose a plausible attempt at contesting the status quo and creating a better life
for all Australians”.

The Commission notes that no action could lawfully be undertaken regarding your
application from 11 April 2022 when the writs were issued for the recent federal
election until writs were returned on 23 June 2022.

Page 1 

s 47F (Personal Privacy)s 47F (Personal Privacy)s 47F (Personal Privacy)s 47F (Personal Privacy)


--- Page 2 ---

Decision 

6. 

The Commission has considered your request and has decided that the Commission 
is unable to review the delegate’s decision at your request, because you are not a 
person “affected by” the delegate’s decision within the meaning of section 141(2) of 
the Electoral Act.  

Material taken into account 

7. 

In making this decision, the Commission has had regard to the material before it, 
including: 

(a)  your email dated 6 May 2022 requesting a review of the delegate’s decision;  

(b)  the delegate’s decision and notice dated 24 March 2022 setting out her 

reasons for that decision; 

(c) the material and other information before the delegate in making the 

delegate’s decision, including the list of 1,649 names provided by VFUD on 
7 December 2021 (7 December 2021 list); the list of 4,680 names provided 
by VFUD under cover of a letter dated 13 February 2022 (13 February 2022 
list); and the results of membership testing of the 7 December 2021 list and 
the 13 February 2022 list set out at [16]-[24] of the delegate’s reasons for 
decision; 

(d) correspondence between the Commission Secretariat and you, including the 
emails sent by the Commission Secretariat to you dated 24 June 2022 and 
4 July 2022; 

(e)  Part XI of the Electoral Act, in particular section 141.  

Section 141 of the Electoral Act  

8. 

Section 141(2) of the Electoral Act provides for making an application to the 
Commission for review of a “reviewable decision”. A decision to deregister a political 
party under s 137(6) of the Electoral Act is a “reviewable decision”. 

9. 

Sections 141(2) and 141(3) of the Electoral Act require the application: 

• be in writing; 
• be made to the Commission; 
• specify an address of the applicant; and  
• include reasons for making the application.  

Your request for review met these requirements. 

Page 2


--- Page 3 ---

10. 

In addition, section 141(2) provides that an application can only be made: 

• by a person affected by the decision who is dissatisfied with the 

decision; and 

• within the period of 28 days after the day on which the decision first 

comes to the notice of the person, or within such further period as the 
Commission (either before or after the expiration of that period) 
allows. 

11. 

By an email dated 24 June 2022, the Commission Secretariat advised you that the 
writ for the recent election had been returned; that the Commission was therefore 
able to process your request; and that if you wished to submit an updated application 
or additional material, you were able to do so. By a further email dated 4 July 2022, 
the Commission Secretariat specifically referred to the statutory requirements in 
section 141(2) and invited you to provide such further submissions or comments as 
you wished. The Commission notes that the Commission Secretariat received no 
response to its emails of 24 June 2022 and 4 July 2022. 

12.  On the material before it, the Commission is not satisfied that you are a person 

“affected by” the decision within the meaning of section 141(2) of the Electoral Act, 
although it accepts that you are dissatisfied with that decision. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

The term “person affected” is not defined in the Electoral Act and has not received 
judicial consideration in the context of electoral law. Judicial consideration of the term 
in other contexts indicates that the meaning of the term in section 141(2) of the 
Electoral Act is referable to Part XI of the Electoral Act, having regard to the subject, 
scope and purpose of the Act as a whole. 

Your email of 6 May 2022 shows that you are dissatisfied with the delegate’s decision 
to deregister VFUD under section 137(6) of the Electoral Act, but this does not 
establish that you are a person “affected by” the delegate’s decision within the 
meaning of section 141(2) of the Electoral Act. 

The Commission is of the view that a person is not “affected by” a decision to which 
section 141(2) applies simply because the person is an elector enrolled on the 
Commonwealth Electoral Roll or a member of the Australian general public. The 
material before the Commission does not indicate that you have any particular 
connection to the delegate’s decision or to VFUD (for example, as a member of the 
Party). This material does not indicate that the delegate’s decision would have any 
particular consequence for you other than as an elector or member of the public. 
Having regard to the terms of section 141(2), Part XI of the Electoral Act and the Act 
as a whole, the Commission has concluded that this is not sufficient to make you a 
person “affected by” the delegate’s decision for the purpose of section 141(2) of the 
Electoral Act.  

Page 3


--- Page 4 ---

16. 

17. 

Accordingly, the Commission is of the view that you are not a “person affected” by 
the delegate’s decision to deregister VFUD under section 137(6) of the Electoral Act 
and that you are therefore not eligible to apply for a review of that decision under 
section 141 of the Electoral Act. 

Other matters 

The Commission notes that the Commission Secretariat has received other 
applications for review of the delegate’s decision to deregister VFUD from two other 
individuals who contest the delegate’s decision for the same or similar reasons to 
your own. The Commission accepts that these individuals are “persons affected” by 
the delegate’s decision and otherwise eligible to apply for a review of the delegate’s 
decision. The Commission proposes to publish the outcome of its review of the 
delegate’s decision on the AEC website. 

Statement of review rights 

18. 

A statement of review rights in respect of this decision is enclosed.  

Page 4


--- Page 5 ---

Yours sincerely, 

The Hon Justice Susan Kenny AM  

Chairperson 

September 2022 

Mr Tom Rogers 

Electoral Commissioner 

September 2022 

Dr David Gruen AO 

Australian Statistician  
(non-judicial member) 

September 2022 

Page 5


--- Page 6 ---

Your review rights 

Under s 141(5) of the Electoral Act, a person (including an organisation) affected by the 
Commission’s decision who is dissatisfied with the decision may make an application to the 
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (‘the AAT’) for review of the decision.  

How is an application made to the AAT for a review of a Commission decision? 

In accordance with s 29 of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975, the application 
must: 

(a)  be made in writing; 

(b)  be accompanied by any prescribed fee; 

(c)  contain a statement of reasons for the application; and  

(d)  be made within the prescribed time. 

The application should also: 

(a)  specify the name of the applicant; and 

(b)  include an address at which documents in relation to the AAT proceedings 

may be given.  

More information on how to apply to the AAT can be found on the AAT website: 
https://www.aat.gov.au/apply-for-a-review.    

Prescribed fee 

The AAT’s standard application fee is $962. In certain circumstances, an applicant may be 
entitled to pay a reduced fee of $100.  

If an applicant pays the standard application fee and the AAT review is resolved in the 
applicant’s favour, the AAT will refund the difference between the standard application fee 
and $100. There is no refund if the applicant paid the reduced fee of $100.  

Further information about fees is available on the AAT website: 
https://www.aat.gov.au/apply-for-a-review/other-decisions/fees.  

Prescribed time 

You may apply to the AAT for review of the Commission’s decision during the period 
commencing on the day on which the Commission’s decision was made and ending on the 
twenty-eighth day after this letter was given to you.  

The AAT may extend the time for making an application to the AAT for a review of a 
decision, if an application for extension is made in writing to the AAT and the AAT is satisfied 
that it is reasonable in all the circumstances to do so.   

Page 6


--- Page 7 ---

Further information about time limits is available on the AAT website:  
https://www.aat.gov.au/apply-for-a-review/other-decisions/time-limits.  

Conduct of a review by the AAT 

The AAT can exercise the same powers and discretions as the Commission to make a 
decision on an application to register a party in the Register afresh and make a decision to 
either:  

• 

• 

• 

affirm the decision under review; 

vary the decision under review; or 

set aside the decision under review and: 

o  make a decision in substitution for the decision set aside; or  

o 

remit the matter for reconsideration in accordance with any directions or 
recommendations of the AAT. 

Further information about the review process can be found on the AAT website: 
https://www.aat.gov.au/steps-in-a-review/other-decisions.  

Freedom of Information 

Under the Freedom of Information Act 1982 (‘the FOI Act’), any person has the right to 
request access to documents held by the Commission.  

For more information about access to documents under the FOI Act, please visit the 
Commission’s “Access to AEC information” webpage at: www.aec.gov.au/information-
access/index.htm.  

Should you have any further queries regarding the Commission’s decision, please contact 
the Commission Secretariat by emailing commission.secretariat@aec.gov.au. 

Page 7