

--- Page 1 ---

From: 
Sent: Friday, 20 May 2022 5:36 PM
To: EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au>
Cc: 
Subject: Re: FW: Your Request to Google [SEC=OFFICIAL]

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or
open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.

Hi EIAT, 

You should now have received a response from Google LLC on this matter. Please do not hesitate to get
in touch if there is anything further we can assist with. 

With best wishes for a successful and safe election day tomorrow to your team and everyone at the AEC,
on behalf of Google Australia. 

Kind regards, 

Government Affairs and Public Policy Manager
Google Australia 

Find me on 
Read the latest Google and YouTube reports
See what's trending in Australia today    

On Fri, May 20, 2022 at 1:25 PM 

> wrote:

Hi Jennifer, 

Acknowledging receipt. This has been sent to our legal team for urgent review. Please standby for
updates. 

Thank you, 

s 22s 47G(1)s 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47FReleased under the FOI ActReleased under the FOI Act


--- Page 2 ---

Released under the FOI ActReleased under the FOI Act


--- Page 3 ---

Subject: Your Request to Google

CAUTION:This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click
links or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.

Hello,

Thanks for contacting the YouTube Legal Support team. We will review your request as soon
as possible. The reference number for your complaint is
U2X2RORLGOGUHPZ7M4OYUBGLHU.

Regards,

The YouTube Legal Support Team

DISCLAIMER:

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email
and delete all copies.  If this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that
error does not constitute waiver of any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of
information in the email or attachments. 

-- 
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups 
To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it, send an email to

.

To view this discussion on the web visit

.

s 47G(1)s 47G(1)s 47G(1)Released under the FOI ActReleased under the FOI Act