

--- Page 1 ---

File reference: XXXXXXXXXX 

Fname Sname 
Email address 

Dear Fname, 

Click or tap to enter a date 

Engagement as an Australian Public Servant (APS) employee for duties that are ongoing. 

Congratulations, in accordance with paragraph 22(2)(a) of the Public Service Act 1999 (the PS Act) the 
Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) is pleased to offer you an ongoing engagement as follows: 

AGS number  XXXXXXXX 

Position title  XXXXXXXX 

Classification  Choose an item. 

Position number  XXXXX 

Status  Ongoing 

Hours  Full time, 37.5 hours per week Add hours for part-time if applicable 

Salary  $XXXXXXXX per annum (pro-rata for part-time) 

Proposed start date  Click or tap to enter a date 

Location  XXXXXXXXXX 

As part of the AEC onboarding process, successful applicants are required to complete a national police check 
and return a satisfactory outcome before commencement. Accordingly, you will receive an email from an 
external provider within the next 1-3 business days asking you to complete a national police check. Once you 
have lodged the national police check, it will be processed and we will be advised of the outcome. This process 
may take up to 15 business days from the submission by you of the required documentation and may impact 
your proposed start date. 

Your conditions of employment and eligibility requirements to commence with the AEC are detailed in 
Attachment A; and, your employment is covered by the AEC Enterprise Agreement 
http://www.aec.gov.au/About_AEC/Publications/enterprise-agreement/contents.htm and any subsequent 
enterprise or collective agreement. 

In order to accept this offer, please sign and return the enclosed form via the Aurion onboarding portal. Any 
delay in returning your signed letter and new starter forms may impact on the AEC’s ability to process your 
payroll information and our ability to have you paid in a timely manner. 

Yours sincerely, 

Adam Scott | Director 
Strategic Recruitment | People and Property Branch 
Australian Electoral Commission 

10 Mort Street, Canberra ACT 2601 | P 02 6271 4730 

www.aec.gov.au


--- Page 2 ---

File reference: XXXXXXXXXX 

DECISION FORM 

I understand the offer made by the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC). I wish to advise my decision is as 
follows: 

Acceptance 

☐ 

☐ 

☐ 

I accept the offer of an ongoing engagement with the AEC and agree to the commencement date of 
Click or tap to enter a date. 

I acknowledge that I will be engaged in accordance with section 22(2)(a) of the Public Service Act 1999 
and, in addition to Attachment A my terms and conditions will be set by the AEC Enterprise 
Agreement 2016-19, or subsequent enterprise agreement. 

In accepting this offer of ongoing engagement, I particularly acknowledge: 

I have received a copy of the Fair Work Information Statement; 

a) 
b)  My obligation to uphold the APS Values and abide by the APS Code of Conduct, and; 
c)  The requirement to maintain political neutrality. 

Decline 

☐ 

I decline the offer of an ongoing engagement with the AEC. 

Signature  ___________________________ 

Full name  ___________________________ 

Date  ___________________________ 

10 Mort Street, Canberra ACT 2601 | P 02 6271 4730 

www.aec.gov.au


--- Page 3 ---

File reference: XXXXXXXXXX 

Attachment A: Terms and Conditions of Engagement as an 
Ongoing Employee 

1. CONDITIONS OF ENGAGEMENT 

1.1.  Engagement with the AEC is, in accordance with paragraph 22(2)(a) of the Public Service Act 1999 

(the PS Act).  

1.2.  Engagement is subject to conditions as stated in section 22(6) of the PS Act, conditional upon the 

Employee satisfying and continuing to meet the following requirements: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

Australian Citizenship; 
Character Clearance (National Police Check); 
Political Neutrality; 
Successful completion of probation; 
Not be subject to any restriction from a previous Redundancy from the Commonwealth 
Government; 
Not providing false or misleading information; 
Complying with the Australian Public Service (APS) Values and Code of Conduct. 

f. 
g. 

1.3.  Your engagement with the AEC is subject to the requirements of the AEC’s COVID-19 Vaccination 

Policy.  

Australian Citizenship 

1.4.  To be eligible for APS employment with the AEC you must be an Australian citizen. 
1.5.  Prior to your engagement you must provide proof of your Australian Citizenship. This might be an 

Australian passport or notice of evidence of Australian Citizenship (usually an Australian Citizenship 
certificate). An Australian birth certificate may not, of itself, be proof of Australian Citizenship. 

Character Clearance 

1.6.  Engagement is subject to the AEC being satisfied that employees are of suitable character to be 
employed in the Australian Public Service (APS). Your engagement is subject to the passing of a 
character assessment, including a nationally coordinated criminal history check (police check). The 
AEC currently uses Equifax Australia Pty Ltd, an authorised agent of the Australian Criminal 
Intelligence Commission (ACIC), for the processing of these police checks, through the Fit2Work 
portal. You will receive your unique Fit2Work login details via SMS or email to complete the process 
securely online. 

1.7.  Additional information may also be sought and considered by the AEC from time to time to determine 

if you are of suitable character. Such additional information may include but is not limited to: 
a. 
b. 

The outcome of any legal proceedings against you; 
Confirmation of information disclosed to the AEC during the recruitment and engagement 
process, including proof of your qualification and previous work history; 
Information about any previous performance or code of conduct matters; and 
Details of any inquiries undertaken by professional licensing and registration bodies. 

c. 
d. 

1.8.  Employees with the AEC may be terminated if the AEC is of the view that you are not of suitable 

character for APS employment or if it becomes clear that a satisfactory security clearance will not be 
obtained or if a security clearance is refused. 

Political Neutrality 

1.9.  The AEC must maintain strict political neutrality and cannot employ anyone who publicly engages in 
political activities or who intends to do so, or where there is a perception that the person is involved 
with such activity. 

1.10.  Should a situation arise during your employment where you wish to publicly engage in political 

activities, or where there may be a perception that you are involved in political activities, you must 
immediately discuss the matter with your manager. If you fail to do so sanction, including termination 
of your employment, may be imposed upon you. 

10 Mort Street, Canberra ACT 2601 | P 02 6271 4730 

www.aec.gov.au


--- Page 4 ---

File reference: XXXXXXXXXX 

Probation 

1.11.  A six month probation period applies to all ongoing employees new to the APS, upon commencement 

with the AEC. During this period, your conduct and work performance will be assessed to determine 
your suitability for ongoing employment. If your conduct or work performance is assessed as being 
unsatisfactory during this period, your employment may be terminated on the grounds of failure to 
meet the conditions of your probation. 

1.12.  The six month probation period may be extended if: 

a. 

you are absent from work for a significant part of the initial six months due to circumstances 
beyond your control (e.g. ill health, injury or accident, jury duty, etc.) and your absence 
prevents an adequate assessment of your performance; or 
due to other factors, your manager is unable to make a determination at the end of six months, 
but believes that you are likely to meet probation within an additional period of time. 
1.13.  In either circumstance, the probation period will not exceed nine months in total. If you require a copy 

b. 

of the AEC’s Probation Policy please contact Recruitment@aec.gov.au. 

Previous Redundancy from the Commonwealth 

1.14.  Clause 48 of the Australian Public Service Commissioner’s Directions 2016 (the Directions) set out 

certain restrictions on the employment, in the APS, of persons who have received a redundancy 
benefit from the Commonwealth Government or from the Australian Parliamentary Service for which 
the redundancy benefit period has not ended. 

False or Misleading Information 

1.15.  Engagement is subject to the condition that the information you provide to the AEC is not false or 

misleading. This includes, but is not limited to, supplying the AEC with false or misleading information 
during the recruitment and engagement process. 

APS Values and Code of Conduct 

1.16.  During your contract with the AEC you are required to adhere to the APS Code of Conduct and the 

APS Values and AEC policies and procedures, which may vary from time to time. 

1.17.  The APS Code of Conduct requires that you must: 

Behave honestly and with integrity in connection with APS employment; 
Act with care and diligence in connection with APS employment; 

a. 
b. 
c.  When acting in connection with APS employment, treat everyone with respect and courtesy, 

and without harassment; 

d.  When acting in connection with APS employment, comply with all applicable Australian laws; 
e. 

Comply with any lawful and reasonable direction given by someone in the employee’s Agency 
who has authority to give the direction; 
Maintain appropriate confidentiality about dealings that the employee has with any Minister or 
Minister’s member of staff; 
Take reasonable steps to avoid any conflict of interest (real or apparent) and disclose details of 
any material personal interest of the employee in connection with the employee’s APS 
employment; 
Use Commonwealth resources in a proper manner for a proper purpose; 
Not provide false or misleading information in response to a request for information that is 
made for official purposes in connection with the employee’s APS employment; 
Not improperly use inside information or the employee’s duties, status, power or authority; 
To gain, or seek to gain, a benefit or an advantage for the employee or any other person; 
To cause, or seek to cause detriment to the employee’s Agency, the Commonwealth or any 
other person. 
At all times behave in a way that upholds the APS Values and Employment Principles, and the 
integrity and good reputation of the employee’s Agency and the APS; 

f. 

g. 

h. 
i. 

j. 
k. 
l. 

m. 

n.  While on duty overseas, at all-time behave in a way that upholds the good reputation of 

Australia; and 
Comply with any other conduct requirement that is prescribed by the regulations.  

o. 

10 Mort Street, Canberra ACT 2601 | P 02 6271 4730 

www.aec.gov.au


--- Page 5 ---

File reference: XXXXXXXXXX 

1.18.  You should fully familiarise yourself with your obligations before commencing with the AEC. Particular 
attention should be paid to the APS Code of Conduct and APS Values. More information in regard to 
these can be found at https://www.apsc.gov.au/working-aps.  

COVID -19 Vaccination Requirement 

1.19.  It is a condition of engagement with the AEC that you comply with the AEC’s COVID-19 Vaccination 

Policy. You can comply with the Policy by having received the primary dosage of any COVID-19 
vaccine approved at the time, or having an exemption approved by the AEC.  
a. 

Currently, primary dosage means two doses of an approved vaccine, according to Federal 
Government recommendations. However, if you are required under state or territory guidelines 
to have a booster vaccination to undertake certain activities in your role (e.g. to attend high risk 
settings), you will be required to have additional dose(s), when eligible. 

1.20.  You are required to provide accurate information about your COVID-19 vaccination status or have an 
approved exemption before being able to commence with the AEC. Upon commencing with the AEC, 
you will be required to provide evidence of your vaccination status, as per the AEC’s COVID-19 
Vaccination Policy. 

Failure to Meet a Condition of Engagement 

1.21.  If it becomes evident that you will not be able to satisfy any of the conditions of your engagement as 

described above, the AEC’s offer of employment to you may be withdrawn or, if you have already 
commenced, your employment may be terminated. 

1.22.  In accordance with subsection 29(1) of the PS Act you will be provided written notice that your offer of 

employment has been withdrawn or your employment terminated. 

Reasonable Adjustment Support 

1.23.  If you have not received your primary vaccination dosage, the AEC will also consider the reason why 
you are unable to be vaccinated and whether it is reasonably practicable for you to be assigned a role 
which does not require you to obtain primary dosage. 

1.24.  The AEC will take into account any reasonable adjustments required to accommodate pre-existing 
conditions or disabilities. You may be required to undertake a medical examination or some other 
form of expert assessment (such as an eyesight test) before commencing your employment.   
1.25.  If you identify with a disability the AEC also has a Disability Contact Officer available to directly 
provide support, information and resources related to accessibility and workplace participation, 
contact DisabilityContactOfficer@aec.gov.au for more information. 

2. TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT 

2.1.  Your employment is covered by the AEC Enterprise Agreement 

http://www.aec.gov.au/About_AEC/Publications/enterprise-agreement/contents.htm and any 
subsequent enterprise or collective agreement. The AEC Enterprise Agreement (including any 
subsequent enterprise agreement that may apply during your employment) is not a term of this 
contract. 

Superannuation 

2.2.  As an ongoing employee, you may have options available to you in relation to your employer funded 

superannuation component. You may be eligible to: 
a. 

b. 
c. 

join the employer sponsored superannuation scheme, Public Sector Superannuation 
Accumulation Plan (PSSap); or 
nominate an alternate superannuation scheme of your choice; or 
rejoin the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme (CSS) or Public Sector Superannuation 
Defined Benefits (PSSdb) Scheme if you have previous Government service (and you 
preserved benefits in the scheme). 

2.3. 

If you choose not to nominate a superannuation account the AEC will request the Australian Taxation 
Office (ATO) advise a “stapled fund” to make payments on your behalf.  If a “stapled fund” is advised 

10 Mort Street, Canberra ACT 2601 | P 02 6271 4730 

www.aec.gov.au


--- Page 6 ---

File reference: XXXXXXXXXX 

2.4. 

by the ATO, the AEC will make superannuation contributions at the same rate as if you had 
nominated a superannuation fund, currently 15.4%. 
If you have any superannuation enquiries, we suggest you contact the relevant superannuation fund 
or your financial advisor.  Please note the AEC is not authorised to supply any advice on 
superannuation. 

Prior Service 

2.5.  Should you have any prior service with the APS, or in government service (as defined in section 10 of 

the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976, or a service referred to in section 
11(2) of that Act) which you would like to be recognised for Long Service Leave purposes, the 
recognition will be subject to confirmation that any break in employment between employers was no 
more than twelve months. 
If you would like prior service recognised you must provide a statement of service completed by the 
previous employer verifying prior service details. The AEC can provide the relevant form at your 
request. 

2.6. 

Payment of Salary 

2.7.  Salary is paid fortnightly, in arrears, via electronic funds transfer into your nominated financial 

institution account. 

3. TERMINATION 

Termination with cause 

3.1.  Your ongoing employment may be terminated by the AEC by written notice for the following grounds: 

a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 

You become excess to the requirements of the AEC, 
You lose an essential qualification, 
Non-performance or unsatisfactory performance of duties, 
Inability to perform duties because of physical or mental incapacity, 
Failure to meet a condition imposed under subsection 22(6) of the PS Act 1999, 
Breach of the Code of Conduct, 
Breaching any term of this contract; 
Being convicted of a criminal offence which affects your capacity to perform your Duties or 
which could, or is likely to, bring the AEC into disrepute; and 
Committing any other act that amounts to serious misconduct. 

i. 
If your engagement is terminated in these circumstances, the AEC will ensure that any amounts 
owing are paid in accordance with clause 2.7 of this letter in the first available pay date following 
termination.  However the AEC will not be liable to you for any further payments.   

3.2. 

If you have any questions or concerns in regards to any of these terms and conditions please contact 
Recruitment@aec.gov.au. 

10 Mort Street, Canberra ACT 2601 | P 02 6271 4730 

www.aec.gov.au