

--- Page 1 ---




--- Page 2 ---




--- Page 3 ---




--- Page 4 ---

and I last week on Thursday 21 July. At that meeting we discussed the ABS 

Thank you for meeting with 
methodology for sampling and testing membership of political parties used by the AEC. You kindly reviewed some 
questions we had and considered some issues raised by applications for review of the decision to deregister 
VoteFlux.Org | Upgrade Democracy! (the Party). The purpose of this email is to summarise the key points raised in 
that discussion. I would be grateful if you could confirm that I have set out your advice correctly. If not, I would be 
grateful if you could edit the response or reply clarify any points.  

If possible, we would be grateful for your response by Monday 1 July 2022. We may provide this information to the 
Electoral Commission for the purposes of their review of the decision to deregister the Party. 

1. What conclusions can be drawn in relation to the list of 4680 names in the Party’s list, following the delegate’s 
decision to test the top 1,650 names of that list (the sub-list)? 

With respect to the test conducted it is not the randomisation or not that is causing the false rejection (or false 
acceptance) rate to land outside the limits. It is the sample size that control the test conditions. If you had 
randomised you would have been able to say something about the whole list as the final sample (probabilistically) 
would have referred to the 4680 not just the 1650. Nevertheless you still would have needed a bigger sample size to 
get the desired risk rates.  

You advised that as the Party’s list was not randomised before the sub-list was made (as only the top 1650 names 
were selected) it is not possible to draw any meaningful statistical conclusions about the Party’s whole list of 4680 
from the results of testing the sub-list. You can only say something about the selected 1650. This is because, without 
randomisation there is no chance of the other records being selected. You explained this by the analogy of 
attempting to sample from a deck of cards for aces. Having failed to first shuffle the deck, chunking the bottom half 
away, and then sample from what is left will not give you useful information about all original cards. Those thrown 
away were never in the running. 

The test done indicates a list with low proportion of eligible members among the 1650. 

DELETE As would usually be the case, as the test of the sub-list failed, it is possible to conclude (to the level of 
confidence to which the test is set) that the sub-list of 1,650 did not include 1,500 members.  

2. What are the alternative options for testing the larger list? 

You explained that a larger sample size would be required to test a large list to the same degree of confidence. 
Current sampling is calibrated so that the probability of accepting an invalid list is less than 2%, and the probability 
of falsely rejecting a valid list is less than 6%. You estimated that the sample size required to test the full list of 4680 
names would be over 300. You also advised that excel spreadsheet calculator provided to the AEC could provide 
information about the sample size required to test a list of 4680 names to different levels of confidence.  

We have now used the calculator (attached), to calculate that sampling a list of 4680 members, where the desired 
probability of false rejection is 6% and the desired probability of false acceptance is 2%, would require an 
approximate sample size of 564 and a maximum number of denials allowed of 399.     

3. Does filtering names affect the error rates? 

You explained that in your view, the arguments made in 
 paper with respect to filtering names increasing 
the error rate are without foundation. You explained that, provided the filtering process is done in accordance with 
the ABS methodology, filtering names works in favour of parties by removing from a list members who would not 
have been capable of meeting the requirements.  

Correct this would improve the ‘quality’ of the list and decrease the occurrence of finding denials (non-members) in 
the list sample. 

4

section 47FS 47F


--- Page 5 ---

4. Your general comments on 

 paper 

 hypothetical example. That example 
You considered that it was not instructive to consider in depth 
started from the premise that the party has more than 1,500 and sought to prove that a specific list could be 
rejected by the sampling methodology.  

You agreed with the general proposition that if the correct sampling size was not adopted in relation to a larger list, 
the likelihood of false rejection increased. This is shown by the calculator.  

We also discussed generally the rationale for requiring a smaller sampling size as a practical and fair method for 
testing party lists. We discussed the difficulties of testing a larger list.  Since the requirement is minimum 1500 a 
party with a very large list that is ‘low quality’ in the sense that it contains a high percentage of non-members will 
require a very big sample size to control false rejection risks. This relates to the incentives of parties to keep good 
records of their members and provide the AEC with a high quality list. Providing large low quality lists should be 
discouraged.  

Legal Services Section | Legal & Procurement Branch 
Australian Electoral Commission 

DISCLAIMER: 

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email and delete all copies.  If 
this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver of any 
confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of information in the email or attachments.  

DISCLAIMER: 

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email and delete all copies.  If 
this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver of any 
confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of information in the email or attachments.  

5

section 47Fsection 47FS 47FS 47F