

--- Page 1 ---

Released under the FOI ActReleased under the FOI Act


--- Page 2 ---

To: EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au>
Subject: Your Request to Google

CAUTION:This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or
open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.

Hello,

After review of your legal complaint, the content in question has been blocked from view on the country
domain.

Regards,

The YouTube Legal Support Team

On May 20, 2022 Contact Us Form wrote:

full_name: Jennifer Krikis

officialname: Australian Electoral Commission

yourposition: EIAT Secretariat, Electoral Integrity and Communications  

Branch

contact_email_noprefill: eiat@aec.gov.au

gov_country: AU

gov_URL: 

gov_explain: In the video there appears to be the following contraventions  

of s 44 Invasion of Privacy Act (QLD) (which is an indictable offence  

liable on conviction to a maximum penalty of 40 penalty units or  

imprisonment for 2 years):

•      5:49 – seen recording a conversation with a QLD police officer,

 no statement about consent to record.

•      3:25 - seen recording a phone call with a journalist (Channel 7 news) –  

states at 3:05 “I’m not going to be telling them I’m recording, because  

they’ll be recording it”

This is also a potential breach of Google&#39;s &#39;Respect Others&#39; Term of  

Service, which requires that users &quot;comply with applicable laws&quot;  

and &quot;respect the rights of others, including privacy... rights.&quot;

The video is also not authorised in accordance with s 321D of the  

Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (Cth), a civil penalty provision.

The AEC has previously written to the video creator,

 warning 

to authorise 

social media accounts and website.

gov_quote: 3:05 - “I’m not going to be telling them I’m recording, because  

they’ll be recording it” - this displays a contravention of s 44 Invasion  

of Privacy Act (QLD).

Additionally, the video is also not authorised in accordance with s 321D of  

the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (Cth).

signature_date: 5/20/2022

signature: Jennifer Krikis

lr_gov_subject: Your Request to Google

hidden_category:

s 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47FReleased under the FOI ActReleased under the FOI Act


--- Page 3 ---

hidden_ctx:

geolocation: AU

DISCLAIMER:

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email and delete all
copies.  If this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver of
any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of information in the email or attachments. 

-- 
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups 
To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it, send an email to

.

To view this discussion on the web visit

s 47G(1)s 47G(1)s 47G(1)Released under the FOI ActReleased under the FOI Act