

--- Page 1 ---

Minutes 

Australian Electoral Commission 
Meeting No. 274 

Date: Wednesday 6 October 2021  Time: 4:00pm  Location: Microsoft Teams 

Attendees:  
The Hon. Justice Susan Kenny AM (Chair);  
Mr Tom Rogers (Electoral Commissioner);  
Dr David Gruen (Australian Statistician)  
Mr Anders Holmberg (Chief Methodology)  

Action Officer: 

 (Commission Secretariat) 

Agenda  

Item 

1.  Welcome 

2.  For decision: Membership testing process and approach 

Paper – Party registration - ABS advice for membership testing lists for 'at least 1,500 members' 

3.  For decision: Manner and timing of non-parliamentary political party register review 

Paper – Political Party Registration - Manner and timing of Register review 

4.  Closing 

Agenda item 1: Welcome and Commissioner’s introduction 

The Chair opened the meeting at 4:00pm. The meeting commenced with the three-person 
Australian Electoral Commission (the Commission) members; the Hon. Justice Susan 
Kenny, Mr Tom Rogers, and Dr David Gruen, and Mr Anders Homberg, Chief Methodologist 
of the Australian Bureau Statistics (ABS), as a guest for Item 2. 

Mr Rogers provided an update to the Commission on administrative matters concerning the 
Australian Electoral Commission (AEC). 

section 47F


--- Page 2 ---

Agenda item 2: For decision: Membership testing process and approach 

In response to recent amendments to the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (the Electoral 
Act) by the Electoral Legislation Amendment (Party Registration Integrity) Act 2021 (the 
Party Registration Act), the Commission discussed proposed sample sizes for registered 
non-Parliamentary political party membership list testing as outlined in the paper entitled 
‘Party registration – ABS advice for membership testing lists for 'at least 1,500 members'.    

The proposed methodology, which examined sample sizes derived from data provided by 
the ABS, is based on the current method with updated sample sizes. 

The Commission endorsed the methodology of the proposed approach but requested 
additional statistical advice from the ABS regarding the percentage chances of incorrectly 
rejecting or accepting membership lists. 

Commission decision:  

•  Agree that ABS staff will recalibrate the parameters in the data provided to the 
Commission to ensure a reasonable (low) probability of rejecting a valid list or 
accepting an invalid list. The Commission will examine the re-worked parameters out-
of-session. 

•  Agree that the Commission endorses the current general approach, noting that the 

methodology is an extension of the existing methodology. 

Agenda item 3: For decision: Manner and timing of non-parliamentary political party 
register review 

In response to the recent amendments to the Electoral Act by the Party Registration Act, the 
Commission examined administrative processes for the AEC to ensure registered non-
Parliamentary parties meet new membership eligibility requirements within the three-month 
period provided by the Party Registration Act.  The Commission endorsed a review of the 
registered non-Parliamentary parties under section 138A of the Electoral Act, with 
subsequent action to be taken under section s137 of the Electoral Act if appropriate. 

Decision: 

•  Agree that the Commission will, for the purpose of reviewing the Register, provide a 

notice under s 138A of the Electoral Act to each registered non-Parliamentary party to 
request specified information to establish that the party meets the 1,500 membership 
eligibility requirement as at 2 December 2021. 

Agenda item 4: Closing 

The Chair thanked members for attending and closed the meeting at 5:10pm. 

Minutes: Australian Electoral Commission Meeting No. 274 

Page 2