

--- Page 1 ---




--- Page 2 ---

20 th March 2021 

Mr Tom Rogers, 
Australian Electoral Commissioner, 
Locked Bag 4007, 
CANBERRA 
ACT 2601 
commission.secretariat@aec.gov.au 
AEC 02 6271 4552 

Request for an Internal Review of decision to Deregister 

the SENIORS UNITED PARTY OF AUSTRALIA 

under s 141(2) of the Electoral Act 

Dear Mr Rogers, 

My name is 
and dissatisfied with, the decision by the Australian Electoral Commission to deregister the Seniors 
United Party of Australia, ( SUPA).  

and I am the applicant for this review. I am a person affected by, 

consider the reasons below which I feel give a strong argument for the AEC to set aside the decision 
under review and make a decision in substitution for the decision set aside. That is, to reregister the 
party. 

 I ask you to please 

The reasons I feel the AEC should consider are:- 

DEMOGRAPHIC  REASONS 

Because of the demographic which the party attempts to represent, that is over 60 years of age, our 
mainly elderly membership suffers a higher than normal attrition rate to other political parties. 

SUPA’s high loss of members is due to:- 

1.   A much higher death rate than in other political parties, as well as long lasting terminal 
      health issues of members that would stop the aged from participating as a member. 

2.   A much higher rate of dementia, or loss of memory, which prevents members recalling that 
      they are members when the AEC calls. This would be a considerable cause for members to 
      answer negatively to membership questions by the AEC representative. ( 

Out of scopeOut of scopeOut of scopeOut of scopeOut of scopeOut of scope


--- Page 3 ---




--- Page 4 ---

understand, of its fear of losing the approximately $1million dollars it receives from the NSW State 
government. Then we have the National Seniors which appears to have agreements with 
commercial interests. Possibly the best is the Council for the Ageing (COTA) which appears to be 
the best, but is getting little recognition from the press. 

Now it has been suggested there are ten lobbyists for every  parliamentarian in Federal parliament. 
Lobbyists that are paid huge amounts and which have huge amounts to advertise to influence public 
opinion in their favour, which can oppose the needs of the elderly, or place the needs of the elderly 
secondary to making profits. 

SUPA is needed to help the Federal government continually see that the requirements of the Aged 
are not being met, and advise the Federal government without a conflict of interest. 

REQUEST 

Considering the reasons I have given, including the far higher natural attrition rate of our elderly 
members, which the vast majority are, their greater chance of lose of memory, and there 
unwillingness to answer “yes “to questions by strangers  over the phone,   and also the fact that 
SUPA alone represents such a large demographic in Australia’s population, I respectfully ask the 
AEC to please consider these reasons and set aside the failed decision and substitute it with a 
pass decision. 

Thanking you for this review. 

ADDENDUM 

I would suggest that under the present test for registration any party representing the Aged with 
members mainly in that demographic would more than likely fail the registration test. I believe even 
major political parties could possibly fail the test. 

Yours Faithfully, 

Out of scope