

--- Page 1 ---

2022 AEC 
Graduate Induction

Monday 31 January 2022

1


--- Page 2 ---

Toilets
Toilets

Kitchen 
Kitchen 

Emergency 
Emergency 
Exit
Exit

Evacuation 
Evacuation 
Point
Point

Before we get started, a few housekeeping things to mention

Toilets are located ****

Kitchen is just behind us where you can refill your drink bottles and where we will 
have lunch

Emergency exits are located next to the lifts – look for the green exit signs. You will 
need your pass to exit so make sure to have it on you at all times

Evacuation Point is Garema Place

2


--- Page 3 ---

ICE BREAKER
What is one thing you have found interesting or that has 
surprised you since arriving in Canberra?

3


--- Page 4 ---

WELCOME TO THE AEC 
GRADUATE PROGRAM

About the AEC
About the AEC

Graduate Program Overview
Graduate Program Overview

Probation and Performance
Probation and Performance

Graduate Work Expectations
Graduate Work Expectations

Advancement
Advancement

Timesheets, Leave, Flex, Hours of Work
Timesheets, Leave, Flex, Hours of Work

Security & Social Media
Security & Social Media

4


--- Page 5 ---

ABOUT THE AEC

Finance Portfolio

Senator the Hon. Simon Birmingham
• Minister for Finance

The Hon. Ben Morton MP
• Assistant Minister for Electoral Matters
• Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister and Cabinet
• Minister for the Public Service

We are 1 of 6 agencies part of the Finance Portfolio. 

Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, the Minister for Finance has overall 
responsibility for the Finance portfolio. He has a long list of responsibilities and is 
supported by a team of Assistant Ministers and Secretary's/Commissioners for each 
agency.

• Budget policy advice and process, and review of government programs.
• Government financial accountability, governance and financial management 

frameworks, including grants and procurement policy and services.

• Shareholder advice on Government Business Enterprises (GBEs) and commercial 

entities treated as GBEs.

• Policy guidance and management of act of grace requests and waiver of debts 

owed to the Commonwealth.

• Policy guidance for Comcover, the government’s self-managed insurance fund, 

and risk policy.

• General policy guidelines for Commonwealth statutory authorities.
• Superannuation arrangements for Australian Government civilian employees and 
parliamentarians, and retirement benefits for Governors-General, Federal Judges 
and Federal Court Judges.

• Asset sales.
• Policy advice on the Future Fund and Australian Government Investment Funds, 
and authorisation of payments from Australian Government Investment Funds to 

5


--- Page 6 ---

entities.

• Parliamentary Business Resources Act 2017 expenses framework.
• Members of Parliament (Staff) Act 1984 (MOP(S)) Act employment framework 

(shared with the Prime Minister).

• Electoral policy.

The Honourable Ben Morton is the Assistant Minister for Electoral Matters

The Assistant Minister for Electoral Matters will have responsibility for the following 
areas of the portfolio:

• Electoral matters (supported by the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC)) and 

will assist on electoral policy relating to charities and other not-for-profits.

• Whole-of-government property policy and administration, including non-defence 

owned estate

• The Public Works Committee.
• Requests for act of grace payments and waivers of debt under the Public 

Governance Performance and Accountability Act 2013

• Government campaign advertising.
• Australian government superannuation – routine matters, including responding to 
correspondence on administration of Australian government superannuation.

• Administrative and operational matters for Comcover, the government’s 

self-managed insurance fund.

5


--- Page 7 ---

EXECUTIVE LEADERSHIP TEAM

Tom Rogers
Electoral 
Commissioner

Jeff Pope
Deputy Electoral 
Commissioner

Michael Lynch
A/g First Assistant 
Commissioner
Enabling and 
Regulation Division

Kath Gleeson
A/g First Assistant 
Commissioner
Service Delivery 
Division

Thomas Ryan
First Assistant 
Commissionner
Organisational 
Transformation 
Division

Tom Rogers is our Electoral Commissioner and is responsible for the management 
and strategic leadership of the AEC.

Jeff Pope is our Deputy Electoral Commissioner (DEC) is responsible for 
overseeing the operational functions of the AEC. This includes monitoring 
performance, risk, compliance and organisational performance. In our 
organisational structure the DEC is responsible for the Deputy’s Division with 
direct line accountability for:
• Finance and Corporate Performance
• National Training & Education Unit 
• Community & International Engagement 
• Legal and Procurement
The DEC is also the AEC champion for a range of priority areas of focus 
including diversity and inclusion and privacy maturity.

Michael Lynch
Kath Gleeson
Thomas Ryan is the FAC of the Organisational Transformation Division which 
was established to design and deliver strategic approaches to transforming 
the AEC, ensuring the agency is future ready now, and continues to refine 
practices to deliver high calibre electoral services.

6


--- Page 8 ---

CLASSIFICATIONS

SES Band 1 
(Branch Head/Assistant Commissioner)

Executive Level 2 
(Director)

Executive Level 1 
(Assistant Director)

APS 1 - 6

7


--- Page 9 ---

NATIONAL OFFICE BUILDINGS

10 MORT STREET

4 MORT STREET

73 NORTHBOURNE 
AVENUE

10 Mort Street – main national office with majority of business areas housed here

4 Mort Street – all of People & Property Branch except payroll and systems and TEW

73 Northbourne – IT, Security and a few other branches

If you need to visit one of the other buildings you may need an additional pass from 
security.

8


--- Page 10 ---

2022 PROGRAM OVERVIEW

 Complete two workplace 

rotations (roughly six months 
each).

 Additional Election Placement

 Participate in the APSC 
Graduate Development 
Program.

 Opportunity to advance to the 
APS 5 classification at the 
completion of the program.

 Final placement at successful 
completion of the program.

All graduates complete two rotations in different business areas, to provide exposure 
to a variety of work within the agency. 
Rotation 1: 31 January – 29 July
Rotation 2: 1 August – 20 January

9


--- Page 11 ---

GRADUATE PROGRAM 
REQUIREMENTS

In order to successfully complete the Graduate Program, graduates are 
required to:

 successfully complete the six-month probation,

 achieve a minimum performance rating of ‘Meets Expectations’ in the 

Individual Performance Plan following Rotation 1,
(normal end cycle review)

 achieve a performance rating of ‘Meets Expectations’, or ‘Exceeds 

Expectation’ in the Individual Performance Plan following Rotation 2, 
(normal mid-cycle review)

 attend and actively participate in all graduate activities and networking 

opportunities, 

 attend and successfully complete respective learning and development 
program requirements, including participate in and complete major 
projects.

10


--- Page 12 ---

PROBATION

As per all ongoing employees newly engaged in the AEC, your engagement is 
subject to satisfactory completion of a six month probation period.

Probation reports are to be completed in Aurion following the below timeframe: 

■ February – Initial probation discussion

■ March – Second month probation report due

■ May – Fourth month probation report due

■ June – Final probation report due

■ July – Probation passed / extended 

Graduate supervisors will assess you against clearly defined expectations 
in relation to:

 your work, including performance measures (are you meeting the 
performance expectations and responsibilities of your role as a 
graduate)

 your conduct, attendance and security practices, and (AEC Values, 

APS Values and APS Code of Conduct)

 will address any identified areas of performance or concerns within 

the probationary period.

11


--- Page 13 ---

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

Effective performance management through regular, ongoing and meaningful 
conversations will help you identify key deliverables and performance 
expectations, which support your work.

What is graduate performance management?

 Ongoing, two-way conversations are the key to effective performance 

management.

 Performance management is designed around the individual 

relationship and its needs - one approach will not suit everyone.

 Graduates need to be responsible for their own performance.

 Supervisors need to be accountable for supporting development in 

skills and experience.

12


--- Page 14 ---

RESPONSIBILITIES

Graduate

supervisor

Graduate 
coordinator

Graduates are required to:

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

actively participate in and complete an IPP with the supervisor within each rotation

participate in and complete probation successfully

actively participate in and achieve satisfactory results in all development/academic activities 
including rotation components and graduate program events/activities and training sessions

adhere to agency policies and procedures and observe the APS Code of Conduct and AEC 
Values

actively partake in the mentoring program

build networks across the agency

ensure rotation supervisors are aware of attendance at all training and events, including any 
changes to dates and times

maintain a strong working relationship with Graduate Coordinator throughout program.

Supervisor

Supervisors duties include but are not limited to:

■

■

introduce the graduates to the team and support them as they transition in and out of the 
workplace rotation

support orientation and provide further contextualised information following induction, as well 
as provide information about the agency such as best practices and policies, organisational 

13


--- Page 15 ---

structure, values, behaviours, and culture

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

supervise graduate and allocate meaningful work in line with the APS Work Level Standards

work with graduates to complete probation report during the probation period (first rotation)

develop an IPP within four weeks of commencing the rotation, outlining clear roles and 
responsibilities, and completing the IPP by the end of the rotation 

support graduates learning and development, including providing constructive feedback, 
opportunities for growth and ensuring that graduates attend and complete all mandatory 
Graduate Program training and events

support and encourage graduates to build networks across the agency

maintain a strong working relationship with the Graduate Coordinator and advise of changes to 
rotation supervisors and ensuring a smooth transition in the event of a supervisor change

escalating any performance concerns to the Graduate Coordinator as soon as the issues are 
identified

providing reasonable hours of work time per week to work on their relevant development 
program major project and assessments.

Graduate

Graduate Coordinator

The Graduate Program is coordinated by the Graduate Program Team / Graduate Coordinator within 
the People and Property Branch who are responsible for liaising with relevant stakeholders to deliver 
a successful program. 

The Graduate Coordinator will be responsible for the coordination of workplace rotations, all training 
requirements and will support graduates throughout the program. The Graduate Coordinator will also 
establish and maintain a strong working relationship with the rotation supervisors to provide support 
in managing the graduate, and work with them to ensure that all required reports and assessments 
are completed on time.  

13


--- Page 16 ---

GRADUATE WORK EXPECTATIONS

 Undertake a variety of administrative tasks

 Actively participate in team and business 

area activities 

 Contribute to the section / branch strategic 

goals 

 Undertake analysis and research 

assignments

 Coordinate requests for information across 

the business areas

 Undertake secretariat work, minute taking, 

etc

 Assist with project management 

 Prepare briefing material, submissions, 

reports or ministerial correspondence

 Other tasks as appropriate

As mentioned previously, graduates will have the opportunity to apply to advance to 
the APS 5 classification at the end of the program. 
If your graduate demonstrates the ability and capacity to take on tasks at the APS 5 
classification during the rotation you can provide those opportunities for 
development to them.
Keep in mind that on the IPP and probation report, they are to be reviewed at the 
APS 4 classification.

14


--- Page 17 ---

ADVANCEMENT

At the end of the Program you will have the opportunity to apply for advancement to the APS 5 
classification. To be successful in advancing to the APS 5 classification, you will be required to 
meet all of the following criteria:

COMPLETE 
PROBATION

ACHIEVE 
PERFORMANCE 
RATING OF “MEETS 
EXPECTATIONS 
BASED ON 
ROTATION 1 IPP 

BE ON TRACK TO 
ACHIEVE 
PERFORMANCE RATING 
OF “MEETS 
EXPECTATIONS” OR 
“EXCEEDS 
EXPECTATIONS” FOR 
ROTATION 2 IPP 

COMPLETE ALL 
AEC & 
DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAM 
LEARNING & 
DEVELOPMENT 
ACTIVITIES

SUBMIT 
ADVANCEMENT 
APPLICATION

successfully complete their six-month probation,

achieve a minimum performance rating of ‘Meets Expectations’ at the end of 
Rotation 1 based on their Individual Performance Plan,

be on track to receiving a minimum performance rating of ‘Meets 
Expectations’ or ‘Exceeds Expectation’ in their Individual Performance Plan at 
the end Rotation 2,

successful completion of all learning and development requirements, 
including all AEC training and Graduate Development Program activities and 
assessments, and

submit an application for advancement as part of the graduate broadbanding 
process.

For Graduates to advance to the APS5 classification, they must meet the 
above criteria, as well as have their advancement response reviewed by their 
current supervisor who will provide comments on capabilities demonstrated 
during the second rotation, followed by a review by the Graduate Coordinator. 

15


--- Page 18 ---

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 

Leave
Leave

FlexFlex

Hours 
Hours 
of work
of work

Study 
Study 
Support
Support

Higher 
Higher 
Duties
Duties

Timesheets must be submitted through Aurion ESS fortnightly for your 
supervisor to approve. 

If the timing has an impact on the Graduate Development Program, please discuss with the 
Graduate Coordinator as early as possible. Training activities, rotations and project 
deliverables must be given high priority.
If the graduate requires annual leave in a future rotation, the graduate will be required to 
discuss it with the Graduate Coordinator directly. 











Leave accessible under the Enterprise Agreement.

Flex accessible under the Enterprise Agreement – be aware of flex levels, 
particularly towards the end of the rotation noting we don’t expect Graduates to 
build high levels of flex.

Hours of work Standard hours.

Study Support Graduates are not eligible for study support during the Graduate 
Program.

Higher duties Graduates cannot be considered for higher duties during the 
Graduate Program.

16


--- Page 19 ---

SECURITY

All AEC staff play an important role in maintaining a high level of compliance 
and keeping our information and IT assets safe. We all need to be vigilant and 
aware of simple steps we can take to help protect ourselves and the AEC 
from attack. A cyber security incident is defined as any (intentional or 
unintentional) unauthorised activity or action that presents a risk to the 
confidentiality, integrity or availability of AEC information. 
Physical and cyber threats

Wear your pass and ensure it is visible – remove your pass when leaving the office

End of day – log off/shut down your computer, clear all documents away from your 
desk, empty printers of printed material, lock up containers and cabinets.

17


--- Page 20 ---

SECURITY CLEARANCE

It is a condition of your employment to be able 
to maintain a baseline security clearance.

Baseline clearance is valid for 15 years before 
requiring review.

You are required to update any details and 
changes with AGSVA.

As an Australian Government security clearance holder you have a personal obligation to 
inform AGSVA of any significant changes to your personal circumstances.
You should report only those events that may affect your suitability to hold a security 
clearance. Reportable changes include:
•change of name or identity including gender
•changes of address or share-housing arrangements
•changes in criminal history, police involvement and association with criminal activity
•involvement with any individual that may be a security concern
•security incidents
•external business interests, including business activities with overseas individuals and 
entities

Overseas travel
AGSVA will assess any overseas travel as part of your clearance revalidation. You should 
maintain accurate records of any overseas travel and comply with any pre-departure or 
post-travel obligations required by your employer, such as reporting planned travel or 
participating in security briefings. It is your responsibility to familiarise yourself with any such 
requirements.
Updating contact details
It is important for AGSVA to have your current contact details in the event that we need to 
reach you regarding your security clearance. AGSVA encourages you to use your personal 
contact details rather than your work contact details. This ensures you receive all 
correspondence from AGSVA even after a change to your position or employer.
AGSVA uses your contact details to remind you when your revalidation or annual security 
appraisal (for Positive Vetting security clearances) is due, and if we cannot get in contact 
with you, your security clearance may be cancelled.

18


--- Page 21 ---

SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY

In general, APS employees must not make public comment that may lead a reasonable 
person to conclude that they cannot serve the government of the day impartially and 
professionally.

If an employee uses social media in a personal capacity, it is not appropriate to use 
knowledge of AEC business, or information acquired as a result of the employee’s duties or 
role, to comment on any issue as this could create a real or perceived conflict of interest, 
including questions of political neutrality, impartiality or independence of the AEC. 

it is not appropriate for employees to make comments that are, or could reasonably be 
perceived to be:  made on behalf of the AEC or the government  compromising the 
employee’s capacity to fulfil their duties in an impartial and independent manner  so harsh 
or extreme in its criticism of the government, political parties, or the AEC’s policies that the 
action would provide grounds for a reasonable person to conclude that the employee could 
not serve the government of the day impartially  so strong in its criticism of the AEC that it 
could seriously disrupt the workplace  a gratuitous personal attack that might reasonably 
be perceived to be connected with the employee’s employment; or  able to compromise 
public confidence in the AEC or the APS as a whole.

One of the APS Values set out in section 10 of the PS Act is: Impartial: The APS is apolitical 
and provides the Government with advice that is frank, honest, timely and based on the best 
available evidence.

Basically Remember that political neutrality is a requirement for all AEC employees. 
Employees may not publicly engage, or be active in, political affairs, including on social 
media. Don’t comment on anything, don’t post your job on facebook. 

19


--- Page 22 ---

QUESTIONS?

20


--- Page 23 ---

Robyn Black
Introduction to the
Chief People Officer

21


--- Page 24 ---

Tom Rogers
Jeff Pope
Welcome from the Electoral Commissioner 
and Deputy Commissioner

22


--- Page 25 ---

Kath Gleeson
Introduction to the 
Service Delivery Division

23


--- Page 26 ---

12:30pm – 1:30pm
LUNCH – MEET YOUR BUDDIES 

24


--- Page 27 ---

Michael Lynch
Introduction to the 
Enabling and Regulation Division

25


--- Page 28 ---

Thomas Ryan
Introduction to the 
Organisational Transformation Division

26


--- Page 29 ---

2:30pm – 3:00pm

BREAK – MEET SOME OF THE 
MENTORS

27


--- Page 30 ---

Employee Relations
COVID-19
WHS

28


--- Page 31 ---

INDUCTION WRAP UP

29


--- Page 32 ---

AEC Learning

Rotation Supervisors

AEC Service Centre

Employee Assistance Program

Buddy & Colleagues

Mentors

Graduate Team

You will have lots of support throughout the graduate program

AEC Learning - Learning Management System which you can access through the 
intranet to access all courses available. National Induction program will also be here 
where you will be required to complete a number of mandatory modules. I would 
recommend getting through these as soon as possible to help your transition into 
the agency. You will do an APS wide induction through the GDP
Supervisors are there for your day-to-day support and to provide you with 
meaningful work. 
Service Centre – single portal to log jobs with various business areas, search 
knowledge guides etc
EAP - provides free professional, confidential coaching and support to help 
employees and their immediate family members manage their general health 
and wellbeing. You can access 24-hour coaching support services 365 days a 
year – over the phone, face-to-face or online.
Buddy & Colleagues – informal people who you will build relationships with 
and can offer support
Mentors – will support your professional development, help guide you to 
where you may want to be and introduce you to wider networks.
Lastly there us – we are here to support you with anything to do with the 
program or if you  just need someone to chat to and are not sure who.

30


--- Page 33 ---

LETTER TO MYSELF

For the 
graduate 
year that 
lies 
ahead of 
you....

What do you want to achieve in your graduate 
year? 

How do you want to make an impact?

How do you want to be remembered? How do you 
want your team members to describe you when 
you finish each rotation?

How can you use the graduate experience to learn 
about yourself? 

You will learn and experience so much in the next 12 months and it will be a crucial 
time in your career to reflect on in the future. To help with this, and help you 
remember how you felt on your first day we thought it would be nice for you to write 
a letter to yourself about what your expectations are for the year and then at the 
end of the program, you can re-read this and see if you achieved what you thought 
you would or if it was completely different.

Give them 15 mins to write something and can use the above as a guide. If there is 
time, allow some to share if they would like. 
Graduate team to them collect the letters in a sealed envelope and keep until the 
end of the program.

31


--- Page 34 ---

Make the most of your opportunity.

“Plenty of opportunities will come along in life, just not this 
one again.”

• Provide and seek feedback

• Manage your own expectations

• Communicate early 

• Build your networks

• Be a sponge and soak up all the knowledge you can

• Be positive and open minded, commit yourself to getting the 

most out of the program!!

 Respect those around you.  You will learn a lot from people’s experience.

 Learn how to manage your manager, develop a good relationship and know 

what your role is.

 If you don’t know or are unsure – ask questions then follow up with your 

understanding!

 Office space – open plan environment!

 Be on time!

 Career progression – take your time.  Wait until you are ready to progress 

and understand the reasons why.

 Mobile phones – please don’t use them in meetings!!!

32


--- Page 35 ---

MEET YOUR SUPERVISOR

0101

Meet your team.
Get your supervisors 
contact details.

0202

Set up your desk, 
adjust your chair  
and monitors.
Familiarise yourself 
with the location 
(bathrooms, exits, 
kitchen, printer etc)

0303

0404

Log onto your device 
– set up outlook, 
check My Details, 
set up signature 
block etc

Set-up a timesheet 
in Aurion.
Locate guide on how 
to complete IPP on 
the intranet.

In your business area, try the following this afternoon.

Logon to your computer – you will need to set up the RSA token – lets all download 
the app now to help prepare.
1. Launch the App Store and search for ‘RSA’. Download and install 

the application titled ‘RSA SecureID Software Token’.
2. Once the install completes, launch the application and press 

‘Accept’ on the Licence Agreement.

3. A ‘Welcome to SecureID’ page will appear. Click ‘Get started’.
4. In the application, click on ‘More’ in the bottom right hand 

corner and then ‘About’. The Binding ID will appear, this should 
be copied into an email and sent 
to AECServiceDesk@aec.gov.au.

Sign IT forms – we will email to service centre

33


--- Page 36 ---

QUESTIONS?

34