

--- Page 1 ---

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Friday, 8 April 2022 10:50 AM
Commission Secretariat
RE: Attention Mr Tom Rogers [SEC=OFFICIAL]

Follow Up Flag:
Flag Status:

Follow up
Completed

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open 
attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe. 

Dear Adam 

My address is 

Thank you 

Isaac Golden 

Dr Isaac Golden and 
CLINIC PHONE:  03 5427 0880 
MOBILE (for
PO Box 695, Gisborne, 3437 
Email: 
Web: www.homstudy.net  

Protect the future of natural medicine in Australia 
Join the Health Australia Party 
www.healthaustraliaparty.com.au 

From: Commission Secretariat <Commission.Secretariat@aec.gov.au> 
Sent: Friday, 8 April 2022 10:12 AM 
To: 
Cc: Commission Secretariat <Commission.Secretariat@aec.gov.au> 
Subject: RE: Attention Mr Tom Rogers [SEC=OFFICIAL] 

Dear Dr Isaac Golden, 

I refer to your email of 7 April 2022 to the Electoral Commission, in which you have requested a review by the three-
person Electoral Commission of the decision of 5 April 2022 to deregister the Health Australia Party and cancel the 
Party’s particulars from the Register of Political Parties. 

As per the review rights in the statement of reasons, and in accordance with ss 141(2) and 141(3) of the 
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918, an application for review must:  

•
•
•
•

be in writing;
specify the name of the applicant;
specify an address of the applicant; and
set out the reasons for making the application.

I note that your application does not contain the address of the applicant. As this is a legislative requirement, I must 
ask if you intend to lodge an application to please provide the address of the applicant in response to this email.  

1

10939391010LEX3070 Released Document No. 7Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 2 ---

Yours sincerely, 
Adam 

Commission Secretariat  
Australian Electoral Commission 

From: 
Sent: Thursday, 7 April 2022 4:43 PM 
To: Commission Secretariat <Commission.Secretariat@aec.gov.au> 
Subject: Attention Mr Tom Rogers 

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open 
attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe. 

Mr Tom Rogers 

AEC 

Commission.secretariat.aec.gov.au 

Dear Mr Rogers, 

RE: BDPXL8:  Notice 
under 137(6) to deregister the Health Australia Party (HAP) dated 5/4/2022 

I refer to the above noted decision by Joanne Reid to 
deregister HAP and I now formally request a review of the decision under S 
141(2) of the Electoral Act. 

I have sought advice from a number of people, especially Mr Mark 
Aldridge in Adelaide. The three principal reasons for making this application 
are: 

1.    1.  The method used by the AEC to determine our eligibility 

is not legislated, and we have been advised would not withstand a legal 
challenge. We have been advised that the direction to submit a list of only 
1,650 members is not legislated. We believe that we should have been allowed to 
submit our full member list of around 3,000 members and allow either the AEC to 

2

10LEX3070 Released Document No. 7Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 3 ---

demonstrate that we did not have 1,500 members or, conversely allow that list 
to demonstrate we did have more than 1,500 members. 

2.    2.  We understand that the 36 members you identified 

as supporting the registration of another Party were not contacted to inquire 
if they wished to be considered as members of the HAP, or the other Party, 
meaning that some probably should have been included in our audit. 

3.      

3. Unfairness: The AEC denied our 
request, as a nationally registered Party, to access the ELIAS database for 
every State and Territory to allow us to confirm that members were correctly 
enrolled on the electoral rolls. We were only given access to the Victorian 
database. This materially restricted our ability to correct our national roll 
(which we had, prior to the second submission, reduced from around 4,000 
members to around 3,000 members). That would have meant that the 5 deceased 
members and the 16 members not able to be matched to the electoral roll would 
not have been included in our list, and we would have had the opportunity to supply you with a more 
accurate list. 

Mr Aldridge advised us that other issues could be raised, 
but we believe that the three above issues alone warrant a review and overturning 
of the decision that the HAP does not have 1,500 members. If, as part of your 
review, we are required to submit our complete list of members, we would first 
request that we be given access to the full ELIAS database so that we can prune 
any deceased or unenrolled people from our list of 3,000. We believe even a further severe pruning would 
demonstrate we have over 2,500 current members. 

We appreciate your consideration of our submission, including your advice as to our current status regarding the 
election which has not yet been called. 

Yours sincerely, 

Dr Isaac 
Golden 

National Secretary 

Health Australia Party 

3

LEX3070 Released Document No. 7Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 4 ---

Personal email: 

HAP email:  executive@healthaustraliaparty.com.au 

7th April, 2022 

DISCLAIMER: 

If you have received this transmission in error please notify us immediately by return email and delete all copies.  If 
this email or any attachments have been sent to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver of any 
confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect of information in the email or attachments.  

4

10LEX3070 Released Document No. 7Released under the Freedom of Information Act 1982


--- Page 5 ---

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

REDACTION CODES 

Personal Information (name) redacted. 

Personal Information (date of birth) redacted. 

Personal Information (place of birth) redacted 

Personal Information (citizenship) redacted. 

Personal Information (racial or ethnic origin) redacted. 

Personal Information (photograph) redacted 

Personal Information (facsimile of signature) redacted. 

Personal Information (facsimile of manuscript initialling) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individual’s address) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individual’s email address) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s telephone number or mobile number) 
redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s political opinion) redacted. 

Personal Information (opinion about individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individuals current or former occupation). 

Personal Information (employment history) redacted. 

Personal Information (qualifications) redacted. 

Personal Information (membership of a professional or trade association). 

Personal Information (membership of a trade union). 

Personal Information (health) redacted. 

Personal Information (membership of a political association) redacted 

Personal Information (religious beliefs or affiliations) redacted. 

Personal Information (sexual orientation or practices). 

Personal Information (criminal record). 

Personal Information (identifying individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (bank account details) redacted) 

Business information (bank account details) redacted. 

Business information (billing account details) redacted. 

Business information (ureasonably affect a person adversely in respect of his 
or her lawful business or professional affairs) redacted. 

Business Information (reasonably be expected to prejudice the future supply 
of information to the Commonwealth or an agency for the purpose of the 
administration of a law of the Commonwealth or of a Territory or the 
administration of matters administered by an agency). 

30. 

Business information (trade secret).


--- Page 6 ---

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

Business information (information having a commercial value that would be, 
or could reasonably be expected to be, destroyed or diminished if the 
information were disclosed). 

Legal Professional Communication redacted. 

Deliberative material redacted. 

Electoral Roll material redacted. 

Tests, examinations or audits material redacted. 

Management or assessment of personnel material redacted. 

Proper and efficient conduct of the operations of AEC material redacted. 

Lawful methods or procedures for preventing, detecting, investigating, or 
dealing with matters arising out of, breaches or evasions of the law redactged 

39. 

Irrelevant material redacted.