

--- Page 1 ---

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Thursday, 5 May 2022 3:22 PM
Commission Secretariat
Application under s 141(2) regarding Health Australia Party

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or open 
attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe. 

To: Mr Tom Rogers 
via email: commission.secretariat@aec.gov.au 

Hi, 

This is an application under s 141(2) of the EA to review the decision to deregister Health Australia Party (HAP) [1]. 

I learned of HAP's deregistration on the 14th of April. 

As a voter I am affected by the wrongful deregistration of political parties and I am concerned that the AEC's 
processes are inadequate. Thus I am concerned that wrongful deregistrations have occurred many times and are 
continuing to occur -- HAP being just one example of more than a do en. 

Particularly: I do not believe the AEC's membership testing method is accurate enough to support the decision. 

This is because, based on the statistics gathered and published by the AEC in [1], the AEC's method had a false 
negative rate of 72.34% ± 0.12% if HAP has > 1769 members. That is, *if* HAP has > 1769 members, *then* it is 
expected that the AEC's method has that false negative rate. 

The number 1769 is important because, based on the data gathered by the AEC, *if* HAP could have submitted 
1769 members then they would have passed this hypothetical membership test. (Note, there is no mathematical 
reason that the membership test methodology could not simply allow longer lists; the only restriction is *AEC policy 
alone*.) 

HAP's Nov 2021 membe ship test had a false negative rate of 72.40% ± 0.12% if HAP has > 1769 members. 

This means that, if HAP has more than 1769 members (which would imply they are an eligible party), that the 
probability that HAP passed either the first test or failed the first but passed the second was only 0.476 -- i.e., 47.6%. 
That's worse odds than a coin flip. 

S nce the AEC, *by the Commission's own policy,* does not allow a party to submit more than 1650 members as 
part of the test methodology, there is no way -- by the best known principles of statistics and the philosophy of 
science available to us -- that the AEC can be statistically confident in the results of the membership test 
methodology, and thus the Commission does not have statistical grounds for the decision to deregister. This is 
especially poignant considering that HAP claims to have ~4,000 members nationally [1]. Considering the AEC's 
measurements to-date, it is reasonable to expect that HAP could produce an additional 129 members unless 
evidence can be produced to contradict this. The membership testing method does not gather such evidence -- and 
parties are forbidden from submitting additional members -- so it is a mystery how the AEC would have such 
evidence. In fact, if the lists that HAP submitted to the AEC have fewer than 1521 overlapping members, HAP has 

1

LEX3070 Released Document No. 6Released under the Freedom of Information Act 198210


--- Page 2 ---

already proven to the AEC that it does have sufficient membership. 

How many members were on both lists submitted by HAP? 

Given the above, I request that the decision to deregister HAP be set aside. 

As evidence of my claims, please see [2] -- particularly Fig 6.6 which is the results of the statistical analysis of HAP's 
Feb 2022 membership test. (A link to the results of the analysis of HAP's Nov 2021 membership test are linked in Fig 
6.6's description.) 

Additionally, I note that the AEC has made trivial mistakes in the documentation and execution of the method (see 
[3]), so I have no faith that those employees or delegates of the Commission that execute the method have any idea 
whatsoever about how to do it correctly, what the requirements for statistical validity are, or how to check that they 
are not making a mistake. 

Thus, the Commission should also reconsider their entire testing framework, setting aside all decisions to deregister 
or refuse registration on the basis of the results of the testing method until such a time when the Commission 
obtains the relevant skills necessary to develop a method that is not predetermined  n some cases. I can't request 
that under s 141(2); it's just my opinion. Seems worth mentioning, though. 

Max Kaye 

[1]: 
https://www.aec.gov.au/Parties and Representatives/Party Registration/Deregistered parties/files/statement-of-
reasons-health-australia-party.pdf 

[2]: https://xertrov.github.io/aec-membership-test-simulator/#6-suspected-farces 

[3]: https://xertrov.github.io/aec-membership-test-simulator/#circa-2012-to-2016 

2

LEX3070 Released Document No. 6Released under the Freedom of Information Act 19829


--- Page 3 ---

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

REDACTION CODES 

Personal Information (name) redacted. 

Personal Information (date of birth) redacted. 

Personal Information (place of birth) redacted 

Personal Information (citizenship) redacted. 

Personal Information (racial or ethnic origin) redacted. 

Personal Information (photograph) redacted 

Personal Information (facsimile of signature) redacted. 

Personal Information (facsimile of manuscript initialling) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individual’s address) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individual’s email address) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s telephone number or mobile number) 
redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s political opinion) redacted. 

Personal Information (opinion about individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individuals current or former occupation). 

Personal Information (employment history) redacted. 

Personal Information (qualifications) redacted. 

Personal Information (membership of a professional or trade association). 

Personal Information (membership of a trade union). 

Personal Information (health) redacted. 

Personal Information (membership of a political association) redacted 

Personal Information (religious beliefs or affiliations) redacted. 

Personal Information (sexual orientation or practices). 

Personal Information (criminal record). 

Personal Information (identifying individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (bank account details) redacted) 

Business information (bank account details) redacted. 

Business information (billing account details) redacted. 

Business information (ureasonably affect a person adversely in respect of his 
or her lawful business or professional affairs) redacted. 

Business Information (reasonably be expected to prejudice the future supply 
of information to the Commonwealth or an agency for the purpose of the 
administration of a law of the Commonwealth or of a Territory or the 
administration of matters administered by an agency). 

30. 

Business information (trade secret).


--- Page 4 ---

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

Business information (information having a commercial value that would be, 
or could reasonably be expected to be, destroyed or diminished if the 
information were disclosed). 

Legal Professional Communication redacted. 

Deliberative material redacted. 

Electoral Roll material redacted. 

Tests, examinations or audits material redacted. 

Management or assessment of personnel material redacted. 

Proper and efficient conduct of the operations of AEC material redacted. 

Lawful methods or procedures for preventing, detecting, investigating, or 
dealing with matters arising out of, breaches or evasions of the law redactged 

39. 

Irrelevant material redacted.