

--- Page 1 ---

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

EIAT

Re: AEC and Twitter follow up [SEC=OFFICIAL]
Tuesday, 7 March 2023 9:09:37 AM
image001.gif
image002.gif

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or
open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.

Hi 

Thank you again for the time with us. Just clarifying here:

-- Yes reconfirming any referrals and/or requests can be sent to
https://legalrequests.twitter.com/forms/landing_disclaimer.

-- 

(Twitter) with 

(AEC) to save inboxes for the high level meeting in early April.

--Understood on the letter and the scenarios, and thank you.

Thank you again for the time with us. Please don't hesitate to reach out with any questions or follows.

With best wishes,

On Thu, Mar 2, 2023 at 12:33 PM EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au> wrote:

Hi 

,

 great to hear from you and 

 yesterday. We really appreciate your time and it’s great to be

working with Twitter in another busy and significant year for us at the AEC. I wanted to follow up with a
quick email to recap some of the outcomes from our meeting.

To confirm, for the proposed referendum and the upcoming Aston by-election, will the AEC be able to
submit legal referral via https://legalrequests.twitter.com?

From our end, in the coming weeks the AEC will look to;

Supply Twitter with a letter outlining the regulatory environment. You can expect this after the
Referendum (Machinery Provisions) Act has passed Parliament.
Provide Twitter with escalation scenarios relevant to the referendum. As 
we’d be happy to discuss a table top exercise to assist in informing your responses. These should
provide some guidance on what the AEC considers mis and disinformation in relation to the
referendum process. A reminder the AEC is an impartial electoral management body and will not be
engaging with the content of the referendum, rather our focus is on referendum administration and
operational delivery.

raised in the meeting,

Separately, following 

 suggestion, we’d be happy to arrange an additional meeting with 

. Grateful if you can provide relevant Twitter contact details so I can confirm availability

and send out a calendar invitation.

 in
We’re also looking forward to locking in a virtual meeting with additional AEC senior executives and 
early April. For context, from the AEC side you can expect the Deputy Commissioner, Mr Jeff Pope, and the
Australian Electoral Commissioner, Mr Tom Rogers to attend. We remain available within the following
times:

1.30pm-4.30pm AEST 5 April
1.00pm-3.30pm AEST 6 April.

Should you have any proposed agenda items for this discussion, please let me know. 
is cc’ed and will provide a Teams meeting invitation, once we have your availability.

, Mr Rogers PA,

As always, happy to discuss any questions or concerns and I hope you have safe travels back to Singapore
next week.

Kind regards,

Section 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47Fs 47F


--- Page 2 ---

