

--- Page 1 ---

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

EIAT; media
Engagement with the Australian Electoral Commission [SEC=OFFICIAL]
Tuesday, 31 January 2023 4:44:56 PM
image001.gif
image002.gif

Good afternoon 
Greetings from what is turning into a disappointingly short summer in Canberra!
The Australian Electoral Commission is interested in scheduling an initial meeting with Twitter to build
on the productive collaboration we had during 2022 and to highlight the change in scope between the
federal election and the proposed referendum which could take place later this year. I understand
that you must be getting contacted from multiple directions at present within Australian government,
however hopefully we can work here to consolidate at least some of that thematically for you over
the coming months.
In terms of agenda – we’re eager to hear about any recent or pending changes to Twitter that may be
of significance to an electoral and/or referendum event. Similarly, we’ll provide an overview of our
preliminary plans to ensure referendum integrity through engagement with the Electoral Integrity
Assurance Taskforce (EIAT) and discuss elements of our communications and public engagement
strategy. Of course, we’ll seek to re-establish the appropriate enquiry and/or referral lines for
electoral issues that may arise on your platform.
As you would be aware, the AEC chairs the EIAT – a cross-Government cooperation between agencies
on matters relating to electoral integrity – and we would look to hold future meetings between
Twitter and representatives of Taskforce agencies as plans for the proposed referendum fall into
place.
If you could advise, at your earliest convenience, a preferred representative/s from Twitter to attend
these meetings, that would be much appreciated. We’ll then seek to confirm an appropriate time to
schedule a Teams meeting.
We of course note that Twitter is undergoing significant change at present and appreciate the
opportunity to confirm our continued engagement and collaboration, in support of maintaining
accurate electoral and referendum information.
Kind regards

 | Director

Defending Democracy Unit | Electoral Integrity and Communications Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

Section 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47f