

--- Page 1 ---

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

EIAT; media
Re: Engagement with the Australian Electoral Commission [SEC=OFFICIAL]
Wednesday, 1 February 2023 11:32:09 AM
image001.gif
image002.gif

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or
open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.

Dear 

Thank you very much for reaching out and glad to be in touch.

Given detail would you or a team member have a few minutes for a quick informal chat this week, just so I
understand requests and steps? Would also welcome the initial meeting with AEC at a time that works for you
over the coming week and two - perhaps we could also arrange that on call?

Thank you again.

With regards,

---------- Forwarded message ---------
From: 
Date: Tue, Jan 31, 2023 at 2:45 PM
Subject: Engagement with the Australian Electoral Commission [SEC=OFFICIAL]
To: 
Cc: EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au>, media <media@aec.gov.au>

Good afternoon 

Greetings from what is turning into a disappointingly short summer in Canberra!

The Australian Electoral Commission is interested in scheduling an initial meeting with Twitter to build on
the productive collaboration we had during 2022 and to highlight the change in scope between the federal
election and the proposed referendum which could take place later this year. I understand that you must be
getting contacted from multiple directions at present within Australian government, however hopefully we can
work here to consolidate at least some of that thematically for you over the coming months.

In terms of agenda – we’re eager to hear about any recent or pending changes to Twitter that may be of
significance to an electoral and/or referendum event. Similarly, we’ll provide an overview of our preliminary
plans to ensure referendum integrity through engagement with the Electoral Integrity Assurance Taskforce
(EIAT) and discuss elements of our communications and public engagement strategy. Of course, we’ll seek to
re-establish the appropriate enquiry and/or referral lines for electoral issues that may arise on your platform.

As you would be aware, the AEC chairs the EIAT – a cross-Government cooperation between agencies on
matters relating to electoral integrity – and we would look to hold future meetings between Twitter and
representatives of Taskforce agencies as plans for the proposed referendum fall into place.

If you could advise, at your earliest convenience, a preferred representative/s from Twitter to attend these
meetings, that would be much appreciated. We’ll then seek to confirm an appropriate time to schedule a
Teams meeting.

We of course note that Twitter is undergoing significant change at present and appreciate the opportunity to
confirm our continued engagement and collaboration, in support of maintaining accurate electoral and
referendum information.

Kind regards

 | Director

Section 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47


--- Page 2 ---

