

--- Page 1 ---

From:
To:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

EIAT
Re: Proposed Referendum Update: Referral of Content from the AEC [SEC=OFFICIAL]
Wednesday, 10 May 2023 6:01:05 AM
image001.gif
image002.gif

CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links or
open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.

Dear 

and Team,

Thank you for your email and the attached correspondence.

Acknowledging receipt and confirming I have shared these with our internal teams.

With best wishes,

On Tue, May 9, 2023 at 2:17 PM EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au> wrote:

Good afternoon 

Recently, the Australian Parliament passed the Referendum (Machinery Provisions) Amendment Act 2023
which amended the Referendum (Machinery Provisions) Act 1984. The Referendum Act outlines the process
for a federal referendum event and includes the role of the Australian Electoral Commission in the
administration and operational delivery of a referendum.

As outlined in the Referendum Act, the AEC is responsible for the administration of laws that deal with certain
referendum communications, this includes some communications shared on social media platforms. The AEC
is providing you with the attached letter outlining the current legislative environment and circumstances where
the AEC may contact you concerning referendum related content.

Further legislative updates:

In addition to the recently passed Amendment Act, the Constitution Alteration (Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Voice) 2023 Bill was also introduced to Parliament in late March. The bill has been referred to a
Parliamentary Committee, due to report on 15 May 2023. Please note, the Bill has not yet passed
Parliament, meaning the referendum is still proposed. Should the constitution alteration bill be passed, a
referendum must be held no earlier than two months and no later than six months following the passing.

While a date hasn’t been announced, the Government have stated their intent to hold the referendum sometime
between September and December 2023. The exact timing is a matter for Government and the AEC is not
provided with advanced notice. The date will be formalised by the issuing of a writ by the Governor-General,
which is the formal instruction to the AEC to conduct a poll.

AEC Information campaign launched:

In April, the AEC launched our referendum information campaign. This initial stage of the campaign is
centred around ‘early-education’ providing information to educate voters on federal referendums. Please see
our media release available here.

As we move through the referendum timeline in the coming months, our campaigns will continue to gradually
change focuses, including topics such as enrolment and voter services (how/where voters can cast their vote).

Throughout the campaign, the AEC will be engaging in digital advertising and media outreach, as well as
working with community groups and other stakeholders, to educate voters on referendums. The AEC will be
directing voters towards our dedicated referendum sub-site at https://www.aec.gov.au/referendums/ for further
information.

We will look to keep you updated with key milestones as our communication campaign progresses.

Referendum resources:

As part of the campaign, we have also launched a number of referendum resources, including our Referendum
disinformation register, which will list prominent pieces of disinformation relating to the referendum process,
the correct information, and any action taken by the AEC. Importantly, the disinformation register focuses
solely on mis and disinformation about the referendum process. The AEC does not have a role in fact-

Section 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47f


--- Page 2 ---

