

--- Page 1 ---




--- Page 2 ---

AEC could please provide further guidance as soon as possible as to the reason(s) why it has 
formed the view that the Advertisements do not comply with the requirements of the 
Authorisation Determination.   

5. 

To assist the AEC, we have otherwise outlined the approach our client has taken to 
authorisation of the Advertisements and compliance with the Authorisation Determination below.   

Approach taken to authorise the Advertisements 

6. 

As explained in your letter, because they contain referendum matter, the Advertisements must 
contain the particulars required by section 110C(5) of the Referendum (Machinery Provisions) 
Act 1984 (Cth).  For a digital communication that is communicated by a disclosure entity which 
is not a natural person, this means that at a minimum, the Advertisements should contain the 
name of the relevant person responsible for authorising the Advertisements, along with the 
name and town/city of the relevant entity (Authorisation Particulars).  

7. 

As you would be aware, section 12 of the Authorisation Determination outlines further 
requirements as to: 

(a) 

the way in which the authorisation should be communicated, including with respect to the 
placement of the authorisation on the relevant communication; and  

(b) 

formatting of the authorisation.   

8. 

In terms of the placement of the authorisations on the Advertisements, we note the following 
with respect to the Advertisements.  

(a) 

(b) 

The Advertisements are digital communications, and are accordingly subject to the 
requirements outlined under section 12 of the Determination.    

The Advertisements are each communicated in the form of a stationary image.  They are 
also each accompanied by text.  Neither of these forms are referred to in section 
12(2)(a)-(c) of the Authorisation Determination.  The requirements of section 12(2)(d) 
therefore apply.  

(c) 

The Authorisation Particulars can be viewed and/or accessed via two locations on each 
of the Advertisements.  These are as follows.  

(i) 

The stationary images contained in the Advertisements each include the text 
‘yes23.com.au’ at the foot of the images.  Yes23.com.au is a URL that can be used 
to access Yes23’s official website, which contains the Authorisation Particulars at 
the foot of the home page.  This form of placement is expressly permitted by 
section 12(2)(d)(ii) of the Authorisation Determination.   

(ii)  Our client has taken the additional step of authorising its Facebook page via the 

‘About Us’ section.  The effect of doing so is that the Authorisation Particulars can 

4164723.1 

2


--- Page 3 ---

