

--- Page 1 ---

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

 EIAT

media
RE: AEC and Twitter [SEC=OFFICIAL:Sensitive]
Tuesday, 29 November 2022 7:45:28 PM
~WRD0000.jpg
image003.gif
image004.gif

Many thanks 
We will try and coordinate around leave of key people on our side and get you an invite shortly.
Kind regards

 | Director

Defending Democracy Unit | Electoral Integrity and Communications Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

 media <media@aec.gov.au>

From: 
Sent: Monday, 28 November 2022 8:48 PM
To: EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au>
Cc: 
Subject: Re: AEC and Twitter [SEC=OFFICIAL:Sensitive]
CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the Australian Federal Government. Do not click links
or open attachments unless you recognise the sender and know the content is safe.
Dear 
Many thanks for reaching out. Great to be connected with you and the team. I had an extensive
handover period with 
collaborative relationship between Twitter and the AEC. I look forward to continuing that engagement.
Confirming that the existing arrangements for escalating legal requests and reports for potential
breaches of our Twitter Rules remain in place. Feel free to reach out if you have any additional
questions.
It would be great to touch base early in the New Year. I'm back on deck the 3rd of Jan and am away the
last week of Jan.
Looking forward to speakin in the New Year.
Warm regards,

before she departed for Canva and was briefed on the productive and

On Sat, Nov 26, 2022 at 11:44 AM EIAT <EIAT@aec.gov.au> wrote:

Dear 
We understand you are now our appropriate contact at Twitter Australia. We thought it would be
good to reach out to you and confirm your contact details and our work together.
We note that Twitter is undergoing significant changes at present, but we welcome the opportunity
to confirm our continued referral processes in the support of maintaining accurate electoral
information and authorisations consistent with Australian law. For some background, you will see
attached referral documentation we used together in the context of the recent 2022 federal
election.
We propose having a more detailed catch up in the new year with relevant colleagues here in the
AEC and from your team. In the meantime, please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any
questions regarding the Australian Electoral Commission, Australian federal elections more broadly
and the proposed referendum.
We look forward to working with you.
Regards

 | Assistant Director

Defending Democracy Unit | Electoral Integrity and Communications Branch
Australian Electoral Commission

Section 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fSection 47fs 47F


--- Page 2 ---

