

--- Page 1 ---

6 December 2023 

Enterprise Transformation 
Group Travel Guideline 

Audience: Enterprise Transformation Group (ETG) 

Classification: OFFICIAL


--- Page 2 ---




--- Page 3 ---

Purpose 

The purpose of this document is to outline the processes that ETG staff need to abide by and follow 
when arranging, booking or undertaking official AEC travel. 

Guidelines  

When undertaking official travel, AEC staff must select the Lowest Practical Fare, which is the lowest 
fare available at the time that travel is booked, that suits the practical business needs of the traveller. 
AEC officials are required to abide by the following guidelines from the Resource Management Guide 
No. 404, Official Domestic Travel – Use of the lowest practical fare: 

•  Value for Money: Value for money is the overarching consideration when booking flights for 
domestic air travel. Value for money requires the use of Commonwealth resources in an 
efficient, effective, economical, and ethical manner that is not inconsistent with the policies of 
the Commonwealth. Accordingly, when booking travel, officials must make decisions based 
on an impartial consideration of the fares available and not on a personal preference for a 
particular airline or aircraft type, access to airline lounges or accumulating airline reward and 
loyalty points (including status credits). AEC staff cannot accrue frequent flyer points whilst on 
official travel, upgrade fares, or select specific airlines on the basis of memberships held. 

•  Necessity of Travel: Air travel must only be undertaken where other communication tools, 
such as teleconferencing and videoconferencing, are ineffective. In approving travel, the 
delegate (the official approving domestic air travel) must be satisfied that there is a 
demonstrated business need for the travel.  

•  Diligence: AEC staff must act in accordance with the AEC Travel Policy and the Australian 
Public Service Code of Conduct. This includes acting reasonably in scheduling meetings or 
other events for which travel is considered necessary (e.g. minimising unnecessary travel 
time). 

AEC officials must make two key decisions when selecting a fare for travel:  

•  Fare class: All air travel must be the lowest practical fare in economy class unless there is a 
business case or entitlement to travel business class. If the relevant delegate approves 
business class travel where there is no entitlement, the reasons for travel in that class must 
be documented in each instance.  

•  Fare type: Where there is a high degree of certainty for required arrival or departure times, 
officials must assess all fares and consider restricted fare types. Where there is a possibility 
that a scheduled meeting will not proceed, or there is uncertainty around the time that a 
scheduled meeting may conclude, officials must consider whether the additional cost of 
flexible fares outweighs the cost of possible changes or cancellation fees. 

Arranging and Booking Travel 

The process for booking and arranging travel, as well as seeking reimbursement of incidental costs 
associated with travel, for labour-hire staff is similar to the process in place for APS staff with a few 
variations. 

Updated as of 6 December 2023


--- Page 4 ---

APS Staff 

•  APS Staff book their own flights, accommodation and hire car (where needed) through 

Expense8 and must adhere to the Whole of Australian Government Travel Arrangements and 
the AEC Travel Policy. 

•  The need for travel must be approved by an APS Director (EL2 or above) verbally or in writing 
prior to booking travel. This is due to the financial and resourcing delegations that exist only 
within these positions. The Expense8 booking should then be submitted to the appropriate 
director for final approval. 

•  APS staff may only be granted approval to use a private motor vehicle for official purposes 
where it will result in greater efficiencies and will not involve unnecessary expenses for the 
AEC. Refer to the AEC Travel Policy for further details. 

•  APS staff will be provided all eligible entitlements through Expense8 automatically once their 
booking has been approved by the delegate. Entitlements will be processed through the AEC 
Financial Management System into their nominated bank account.  

•  APS staff must adhere to the Travel Policy and the Enterprise Agreement for their 

entitlements regarding travel time. 

•  APS staff travelling by taxi are to pay for their fare with an AEC credit card and retain the 

receipt. If the traveller does not have an AEC credit card, they can use a personal card and 
the cost will be reimbursed by submitting a request in Expense8 with the receipt attached. 
Labour-hire staff travelling with APS Staff should share taxis where possible. 

•  APS staff may access ride-sharing services when on official travel and where they are legal. 
AEC staff must not use their AEC credit card to pay for these services (or store the card 
details in their ride-share app). The traveller can use a personal card and the cost will be 
reimbursed by submitting a request in Expense8 with the receipt attached. 

Labour-hire Staff 

•  Flights, accommodation and hire car (where needed) will be booked by the Program Support 

Team for labour-hire staff in line with the Whole of Australian Government Travel 
Arrangements and the AEC Travel Policy. 

•  The need for travel must be approved by an APS Director (EL2 or above) in writing prior to 
booking travel. This is due to the financial and resourcing delegations that exist only within 
these positions. This written approval must be attached to the Expense8 travel booking when 
it is submitted for final approval. 

•  Labour-hire staff should only consider the use of a private vehicle for travel as a final 

contingency where flights and hire car arrangements are not feasible. This kind of travel 
requires prior approval in writing by an AEC Assistant Commissioner, the Labour-Hire Staff’s 
Employment Vendor and Program Support. In these cases, the vehicle will not be covered by 
AEC insurance as per the AEC Travel Policy. 

•  As labour-hire staff do not hold Expense8 profiles, travel booking requests are made via the 

Travel Booking Template Form.   

•  The Travel Booking Form must be sent by email to 

 with proof of the 

travel approval from an APS Manager. 

•  The AEC will complete the booking and send the travel documents by email to the traveller 

once finalised. 

•  All required Taxi or Ride-share costs between Home-Airport-Accommodation-Workplace 

during work-related travel should be claimed via the labour-hire staff member’s recruitment 

Updated as of 6 December 2023 

s22


--- Page 5 ---

vendor by providing receipts in the first instance and will be paid in line with the AEC Travel 
Policy. 

•  Labour-hire staff can claim travel time (airport-to-airport). This will be calculated from one hour 
prior to the flight time until the flight arrival time at the destination. Travel to and from each 
airport cannot be claimed.  

•  All meal and incidental costs incurred by labour-hire staff for work-related travel should be 

claimed via the labour-hire staff member’s recruitment vendor by providing itemised receipts. 
Meals and incidentals can be claimed of actual costs for the amount spent, up to the rates 
below: 

Breakfast 

$32.10 

Lunch 

Dinner 

$36.10 

$61.50 

Incidentals 

$23.00 

•  Reimbursement claims must be approved by an AEC delegate and included in a correctly 

rendered invoice along with all relevant itemised receipts to substantiate any claims. The total 
amount claimable per day is $152.70 for each full day worked; the amount is pro-rated for 
part-days.  

•  The AEC does not reimburse any claims for purchases of alcoholic beverages.  

Service Standards 

Requests to book travel must be sent to Indigo Support at least 10 business days prior to the travel 
departure date, where possible.  

If travel is required within 10 business days, or the request is urgent, please email 

copying in the Program Coordinator and the Program Support Director and 

mark your email as urgent. The relevant Assistant Commissioner will be required to approve this 
urgent travel request. 

More information can be found on the AEC travel intranet site at 

Updated as of 6 December 2023 

s22s22