

--- Page 1 ---

Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 2 ---

Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 3 ---

ii.

matter that so  nearly resembles the name or an  abbreviation or acronym of the
name of a recognised political party (within the meaning of subsection  129(2)) that
the matter is likely to be confused with or mistaken for that name or that
abbreviation or  acronym,  as the case may be.

Logo Validation 
The logo has been assessed against the specifications described in Commonwealth Electoral 
(Logo Requirements) Determination 2016 and has met the requirements (the validation  email is at 
folio  76). 

Background Check 
The Party's logo has been checked by Cre8ive and the AEC has been advised there are no issues 
with the Party's logo and there were no similar logos found (folio 92). 

In summary, the proposed logo is not prohibited under s 129A of the Electoral Act. 

C 

Assessment of membership list 
The membership list  submitted by  the Party  contained 550 members. This list was checked 
automatically using RMANS,  with 513 members identified on the electoral roll.  A further 35 
members were manually identified on the electoral roll using GENESIS while two  members were 
unable to be matched to the roll. 

No members were identified as duplicates within the list and four members were identified as 
cross-party duplicates. 

On 14 January 2019,  the Party elected to remove three members from the Party's membership list. 
See folio 96 for a breakdown of the membership numbers. 

A list of 541 members requires contact with a random sample of 47 members under the formula 
provided by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (folio 94).  For the AEC to be satisfied that the Party 
has the required 500 members, six denials of membership are permitted. 

The relevant numbers for this membership test were: 

1.
2.

3.

the random sample size  was 47
the AEC attempted to contact 60 members, as some members were uncontactable or
provided a neutral response
the highest 47 responses were:
47 confirmed membership
-
none denied membership.

A record of those contacted is at folio 97.  Based on this information the Party's membership list 
passed the membership testing assessment of the application process. 

Other procedural application reguirements 
The application for registration as a political party: 
•

was in writing, signed by 10 members of the Party, one of whom is the Secretary of the
Party;
set out the name and address of the person who is to be the Registered Officer of the Party
for the purposes of the Electoral Act;
advised whether the Party wishes to receive moneys under Division 3 of Part XX of the
Electoral Act;
set out the name and address of the applicants and particulars of the capacity in which
each applicant makes the application;  and
was accompanied by a fee of $500.

•

•

•

•

3 

LS7540 Released Document No. 4Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 4 ---

Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 5 ---

Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 6 ---

Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 7 ---

REDACTION CODES 

Personal Information (name) redacted. 

Personal Information (date of birth) redacted. 

Personal Information (photograph) redacted 

Personal Information (facsimile of signature) redacted. 

Personal Information (facsimile of manuscript initialling) redacted. 

Personal Information (Individual’s address) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s telephone number) redacted. 

Personal Information (individual’s opinion) redacted. 

Personal Information (opinion about individual) redacted. 

Personal Information (employment history) redacted. 

Personal Information (qualifications) redacted. 

Personal Information (health) redacted. 

Personal Information (identifying individual) redacted. 

Business information (Bank Account details) redacted. 

Business information (Billing Account details) redacted. 

Business information (internal operations) redacted. 

Legal Professional Communication redacted. 

Deliberative material redacted. 

Irrelevant material redacted. 

Electoral Roll material redacted. 

Tests, examinations or audits material redacted. 

Management or assessment of personnel material redacted. 

Proper and efficient conduct of the operations of AEC material redacted. 

Lawful methods or procedures for preventing, detecting, investigating, or 
dealing with matters arising out of, breaches or evasions of the law. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

Freedom of Information Release