

--- Page 1 ---

Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 2 ---

Charter 

The  Australian  Democrats  is  a  political  party  beholden  to  no  group  or  groups  in  the 
community but aiming to serve the best interests of all Australians. 

Our  purpose  is  to  work  for  societies  which  live  within  the  resources  of  the  planet,  are 
democratically  elected  at  all  levels,  and  peacefully  co-exist  with  people  of  different 
nationalities, ethnic groups and religions. 

In Australia we are committed to:- 

1. Developing  our  resources  and  infrastructure  in  ecologically  sustainable  ways  to  leave  a
rich. unpolluted, and biologically diverse environment for future generations to enjoy.

2. Supporting  ways  of  managing  the  worlds  economy  with  respect  for  global  resources  and
animal welfare.

3. Maintaining the quality of human relationships in all social interactions through openness,
tolerance, compassion and a sense of mutual interdependence.

4. Achieving participatory democracy at all levels of our society, in which people accept and
have respect for the democratic decision making processes from the workplace to the nation.
This  requires  open  and  transparent  government  at  al  levels,  and  government  guarantees  of
freedom  of  speech,  free  media,  independent  institutions  and  an  informed  and  educated
population.

5. Joining internationally with other democratic political parties to counter world wide threats
to democracy, the environment and social order brought on by agreements between nations
and corporations.

6. Guaranteeing  social  and  political  rights,  responsibilities  and  freedoms  for  all  Australians  -
including  adequate  food.  shelter  and  health  care,  good  and  continuing  education  from  early
childhood,  meaningful  employment,  and  being  treated  with  equal  dignity  and  respect
regardless of gender, other physical and cultural differences and differences of inheritance.

7. Distributing income, wealth, social services and opportunity equitably without undermining
either incentive or self fulfilment.

8. Achieving  reconciliation  with  aboriginal  Australians  together  with  a  national  strategy  to
address Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander disadvantage.

9. Supporting human rights and welfare globally.

10. Frankness  about  Australia's  interests  and  values  in  our  dealings  with  other  nations.  and
acting  to  protect  each  nation's  right  to  decide  its  own  future,  within  the  framework  of
international law, to achieve cultural and economic autonomy.

11. An independent foreign policy, and a non-nuclear defence policy.

We make these commitments with faith in the human capacity for inventiveness, anticipating 
the possibility of new ways of thinking, beyond our current limitations. Our aim is to set within 
this  country  the  social  and  economic  conditions  in  which  this  creative  spirit  can  survive  and 
expand. and to provide the kind of leadership which can lift peoples hearts and minds to the 
level demanded by the challenges of our times. 

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 3 ---

1 
1.1 
1.2 

IDENTITY AND STANDING
The name of the Party is the Australian Democrats. 
This  constitution  identifies  the  principles  governing  the 
conduct  of 
the  bodies 
the  Party's  affairs  and 
responsible for implementing them. 

1.3  All  other  Party  documents  are  subordinate  to  this 

1.4 

2 
2.0 

constitution. 
This  constitution  can  be  changed  only  by  a  resolution 
which  is  supported  by  a  70  per  cent  majority  of  such 
members of the Party as, being entitled to do so, vote 
in a party ballot in accordance with this constitution. 

DEFINITIONS
In  this  constitution,  unless  some  other  meaning  is 
clearly intended: 
'absolute  majority'  means  more  than  half  of  the 
persons entitled to vote; 
'body'  means  a  committee  or  officer  of  the  Party  at 
national, divisional or branch level; 
'branch'  means  a  group  of  members  within  a  division 
who conduct meetings at a local level; 
'division'  means  the  organisation  of  the  members  of 
the  Party  within  each  state  and  territory  of  Australia, 
unless otherwise provided for in this constitution; 
'elected public office' means an elected position in a 
state,  territorial  or  federal  parliament,  or  municipal 
council or other similar body within Australia; 
'executive' means the national executive of the Party; 
'financial  member'  means  a  member  whose 
membership  status  is  financial  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions of this constitution; 
'journal'  means  the  National  Journal  of  the  Party  as 
specified in this constitution; 
'majority' means more than half of the persons voting; 
'member'  means  a  person  who  is  enrolled  as  a 
member of the Party; 
'membership officer' means the national Membership 
Officer; 
'Party' means the national organisation; 
'party  ballot'  means  a  ballot  open  to  all  members  of 
the Party who are qualified under this constitution; 
'policy' means a public statement by the Party for and 
on  behalf  of  the  members  and  endorsed  candidates 
and  the  Parliamentary  representatives  of  the  Party  on 
matters  of  general  and/or  specific  concern  to  the 
people  of  Australia,  which  statement  shall  take  the 
form  of  a  declaration,  opinion  and/or  pledge  and  shall 
be  determined  according  to  the  provisions  of  this 
constitution; 
'political  party'  means  an  organisation  or  group  of 
people active in political affairs related to achieving the 
election  of  persons  to  any  state,  territory  or  Federal 
Parliament; 
'preselection' means the endorsement by the Party, in 
accordance  with  the  relevant  constitutional  provisions, 
of  a  person  to  stand  as  a  candidate  of  the  Party  for 
elected public office; 
'region' means a group of branches; 
'relevant  governing  body'  in  a  national  context  means 
the  National  Executive,  in  a  divisional  context  means 
the  governing  body  of  the  division,  and  in  a  branch 
context the governing body of the branch; 
'relevant  members'  in  a  national  context  means  the 
members  of  the  Party,  in  a  divisional  context  the 
members  of  the  division,  and  in  a  branch  context  the 
members of the branch; 
'state' means a state or territory of the Commonwealth 
of Australia; 

2.1  Any  provision  requiring  a  person's  signature  on  a 
document  must  be  construed  as  meaning  that  such 
document be signed by that person with their personal 
signature, except that where a person is unable to sign 
their  name  in  writing  then  their  signature  must  be 
deemed  to  be  their  mark  where  this  is  identifiable  as 
such  and  is  made  in  the  presence  of  a  witness  who 
must  personally  sign  the  document  as  such  witness; 
and 

3 
3.1 

3.2 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

3.6 

3.7 

3.8 

3.9 

PARTY OBJECTIVES
To  be  beholden  to  no  group  or  groups  in  the 
community  but  to  serve  the  best  interests  of  all 
Australians. 
To  accept  the  challenges  of  the  predicament  of 
humankind  on 
its  exponentially 
the  planet  with 
increasing  population,  disappearing  finite  resources 
and accelerating deterioration of the environment. 
To  recognise  the  interdependence  of  all  people  and 
nations,  to  co-operate  with  the  United  Nations,  and  to 
accept  our  obligation  to  the  developing  countries  by 
co-operating  with  them  in  their  social  and  economic 
development and quest for environmental protection. 
To  seek  the  transition  to  a  sustainable  economy,  in 
equilibrium with world resources and ecosystems, with 
a  minimum  of  dislocation  by  planning  and  increasing 
public awareness of the problems. 
To  be  even-handed  to  employee  and  employer,  and 
reconcile  their  real  interests  by  encouraging  industrial 
democracy  and  other  appropriate 
forms  of  co-
operation. 
To  foster  greater  understanding  and  equity  between 
city and country dwellers. 
the  development  of  a  multi-faceted 
To  stimulate 
national  culture,  with  full  opportunity  for  all  groups  to 
contribute. 
To further unite the people of Australia by co-operative, 
indicative  national planning, taking into account social, 
economic and environmental objectives. 
To  seek 
the  quality  of  human 
in 
relationships in all aspects of society and the economy, 
through  honesty,  tolerance,  compassion  and  a  sense 
of mutual obligation. 

improvement 

3.10  To  decentralise  power,  to  oppose  its  concentration  in 
the  hands  of  sectional  groups,  and  to  ensure  that  the 
power  of  large  groups  or  bureaucracies  is  not  allowed 
to  override  the  interests  of  individuals  or  smaller 
groups. 

3.11  To  achieve  and  defend  effective  participatory 
democracy  and  open  government  by  appropriate 
constitutional, 
governmental 
reforms. 

parliamentary 

and 

3.12  By  supporting  existing  rural  and  provincial  industries 
and in other ways, to stem, and finally reverse, the flow 
of population to the cities. 
In  social  and  health  services  to  emphasise  prevention 
rather than cure. 

3.13 

3.14  To  foster  community  activities  and  the  growth  of 
community  spirit,  bringing  government  and  health  and 
social services closer to the people. 

3.15  To  enable  people  to  pursue  their  own  way  of  life  so 

long as they do not interfere with the rights of others. 

3.16  To  provide  throughout  life  an  education  for  living  as 

well as for earning a living. 

3.17  To  ensure  ready  access  to  the  media  for  public 

communication. 

3.18  To  ensure  that  the  basic  needs  of  all  people  are 
securely  met,  and  to  distribute  income,  wealth,  social 

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 4 ---

services  and  opportunity  more  equitably  without 
undermining either incentive or self-respect. 

3.19  To encourage individual initiative and enterprise and to 

recognise the need for self-fulfilment. 

3.20  Animals  should  be  protected 

from  cruelty  and 

exploitation. 

3.21  To  recognise 
determination. 

the  rights  of  all  peoples 

to  self-

3.22  To  ensure  the  maintenance  of  biodiversity,  to  protect 
threatened  species  and  to  provide  for  better  habitat 
protection. 

(b) such application is accompanied by the appropriate
joining fee or evidence that this has been paid to the
Party in a manner specified by or acceptable to the
executive; and

(c) such  application  includes  a  declaration  by  the
person  that  they  subscribe  to  this  constitution  and
are not a member of another political party.
4.1.7  The  executive  must  determine  the amount payable by 

way of fee or fees 
(a) by  a  person  applying  to  be  enrolled  as  a  member,

such fee to be referred to as the joining fee,

3.23  To  seek  the  election  to  the  Commonwealth  and  State 
Parliaments, 
form 
governments,  of  endorsed  Party  members  committed 
to Party objectives. 

sufficient 

numbers 

to 

in 

4  MEMBERSHIP
4.1  Membership  of  the  Australian  Democrats  is  open  to 
any  person  who  is  not  expressly  excluded  from 
membership,  is  not  a  member  of  another  Australian 
political  party, 
this 
constitution, and pays the prescribed fee; provided that 
the Party may reject an application on the ground that 
its acceptance would be against the Party's interests. 

to  comply  with 

is  prepared 

4.1.1  A  person  shall  be  entitled  to  join  the  Australian 
Democrats  as  an  associate  member.    Such  people 
shall  have  the  same  rights  as  other  members,  except 
that  they  shall  have  no  voting  rights  or  automatic 
entitlement  to  receive  the  Journal  or  other  regular 
Australian  Democrat  communications,  and  may  not 
stand  for  any  Australian  Democrat  or  public  office  or 
publicly 
the  Australian  Democrats. 
Applications  to  become  an  associate  member  are 
subject  to  the  same  procedures  for  approval  and 
rejection as ordinary membership applications, with the 
exception  that  these  processes  may  be  effected  by 
Divisional Membership Officers. 

represent 

4.1.2  Review 

of  membership 

the 
responsibility of each division's executive or such other 
body as the division determines. 

applications 

is 

body 

divisional 

4.1.3  An  application is rejected  if it is opposed by either the 
responsible 
the  National 
Management  Committee  within  the  first  six  months 
after  a  member  is  enrolled,  and  such  opposition  is 
supported  by  the  National  Executive  at  its  next 
meeting.    Otherwise,  or  if  it  is  approved  by  both  the 
responsible  divisional  body  and 
the  National 
Management Committee, the application is accepted. 

or 

4.1.4  clause deleted. 
4.1.5  A member is deemed to be enrolled upon receipt of the 

application by the National Membership Officer. 

4.1.5a If opposition to a membership application is expressed 
during  the  first  six  months  after  a  member  is 
enrolled  the  procedures  under  4.1.3  are  to  be 
applied. 

4.1.5b Members  are  not  entitled  to  vote  in  party  ballots  at 
national,  divisional  or  branch  level  until  six  months 
after they are enrolled, but may take part in all other 
party  activities,  excluding  declarations  made  under 
clause  11.6  of  this  constitution  or  ballot  provisions 
under  14.9  of  this  constitution  and  subject  to  this 
Constitution  and  its  Regulations.    Members  who 
have been enrolled for less than six months shall be 
known  as  non-voting  members.   If no opposition to 
an  application  has  been  expressed  during  the  first 
six  months  of  enrolment,  the  member  becomes  a 
voting member.   A  petition for the purposes of this 
regulation is considered to be a party ballot.  
4.1.6  The membership enrolment of a person who is entitled 
to such enrolment in accordance with clause 4.1 must 
be  effected  by  the  membership  officer  upon  receipt  of 
a written application from that person, provided that: 
(a) such application has been signed by the person;

3 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

(b) by  a  member 

their
membership,  such  fee  to  be  referred  to  as  the
renewal fee;

renewing  or  continuing 

(c) by a person applying to be enrolled as an associate
member, such fee to be referred to as the associate
joining fee;

and in so determining, the executive must also specify 
the period of time for which the payment of such fee or 
fees  confers 
relevant 
membership, and in default such period of time is one 
year. 

financial  status 

the 

to 

fees  performed 

4.1.8  Any  increase  of  the  amount  payable  by  way  of 
in  accordance  with 
membership 
regulation  4.1.7  above  must  be  by  resolution  of  the 
executive  after  notice  of  that  proposal  has  been 
published  in  an  issue  of  the  journal  available  to  the 
membership at least thirty days prior to the meeting of 
the executive where the question is to be decided. 
4.1.9  The  initial  period  of  membership  expires  at  the  end  of 
the twelfth month following enrolment.  Membership is 
then renewable annually. 

4.1.10 A  member  must  have  their  membership  enrolment 
continued  or  renewed  by  the  membership  officer 
according  to  the  procedures  specified  for  this  in  the 
regulations  of  this  constitution  and  resolutions  of  the 
executive  provided  only  that  the  appropriate  renewal 
fee  has  been  paid  to  the  Party  in  a  manner  specified 
by or acceptable to the executive. 

4.1.11 A  person  ceases  to  be  enrolled  as  a  member  if  the 
financial  status  of  their  membership  is  more  than 
twelve  (12)  months  in  arrears  with  respect  to  their 
renewal  fee,  or  if  they  have  resigned  from  the  Party 
where  such  resignation  is  in  writing  and  is  signed  by 
the  member,  or  resigned  by  email  where  such  email 
notification  is  verified  by  the  NMO  and  a  48  hour 
‘cooling-off’ period has been observed, or if they have 
the 
been  expelled 
provisions of this constitution. 

the  Party  pursuant 

from 

to 

4.1.12 The  rights,  privileges,  entitlements  and  duties  of 
membership  as  specified  in  this  constitution  and  any 
constitution  of  the  division  and  branch  to  which  the 
to  and 
member  may  belong  must  be  extended 
honoured  by  a  person  enrolled  as  a  member  where 
that  membership  has  the  status  of  financial  voting 
member, or where that membership has had the status 
of  unfinancial  for  no  more  than  three  (3)  months; 
otherwise  while  the  person  remains  enrolled  as  a 
member  they  may  not  exercise  or  be  permitted  to 
exercise those rights, privileges, and entitlements other 
than to renew their membership. 

4.1.13 It  is  the  duty  of  each  member  to  promptly  forward  to 
the  membership  officer  all  necessary 
renewals 
information  and  changes  of  information  needed  to 
maintain  accurate  information  about  their  membership 
enrolment. 

4.1.14 It  is  the  duty  of  the  membership  officer  and  the 
executive  to  do  all  that  is  reasonable  to  ensure  that 
renewals  and  other 
the 
membership  roll  are  properly  and  promptly  processed 
so  as  to  ensure  the  accuracy  of  the  membership  roll; 
and  such  processing  must  be  complete  in  less  than 
three (3) months. 

information 

relevant 

to 

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 5 ---

4.1.15 No person may claim to be a member, or claim to hold 
or  be  entitled  to  exercise  any  right  of  membership 
given by virtue of this constitution or the constitution of 
any  division  branch  or  other  body  of  the  Party  in  any 
way whatsoever unless they are actually enrolled as a 
member according to the provisions of this constitution 
and its regulations. 

4.2 

then 

to  be  determined, 

4.1.16 In  the  event  that  the  status  of  a  person's  membership 
the 
enrolment  needs 
membership roll maintained by the membership officer 
in accordance with the requirements of this constitution 
and  its  regulations  and  relevant  resolutions  of  the 
executive, is conclusive. 
The  National  Executive  may  expel  from  the  Party  any 
person who: 
(a) (Clause deleted - see Clause 4.10)
(b) while  a  member  of  the  Party,  retains  or  accepts
membership  in  another  political  party  provided  that  in
this  case  any  such  person  shall  first  be  allowed  one
month to choose to resign either from the Party or from
the other party.

4.2.1   A  person  who  is  expelled  from  the  party  or  whose 
membership  is  rejected  by  the  National  Executive  is 
excluded  from  membership  until  otherwise  determined 
by the National  Executive. 

4.2.2  Any form of membership of an organisation registered 
as,  or  in  the  explicit  opinion  of  the  National  Executive 
is, a political party in Australia or any State or Territory 
of  Australia  is  membership  of  another  Australian 
political party. 

4.3  Persons  excluded  from  membership  of  the  Party  may 
they  were 

appeal  against  such  exclusion  as 
members. 

if 

4.5 

the  Party 

4.4  A  member  shall  be  deemed  to  have  immediately 
resigned  membership  without  entitlement  to  appeal, 
upon  that  member  using  the  words  'Democrat'  or 
'Australian Democrat' (or any plural form thereof) or so 
describing  themselves  as  part  of  or in connection with 
electoral  materials  relating  to  the  Federal,  State  or 
local  election  in  which  they  are  not  a  duly  endorsed 
candidate or has not been given prior authorisation by 
the  party  for  that  election,  or  in  which  the  member 
(having  been  previously  endorsed)  has  ceased  to  be 
endorsed or authorised at a time prior thereto.  It shall 
not  be  necessary  for  such  resignation  to  be  formally 
accepted by the executive before becoming effective. 
(a)  Each  member  of 
to 
membership  of  only  one  division  and  one  branch  of 
that division. 
(b) Each  member  is  entitled  to  membership  of  the
division and branch in which that member is resident.
(c) Each  member  may  be  granted  membership  of
another division by that division.
(d) Each  member  may  be  granted  membership  of
another branch by that branch.
(e) Each division may specify conditions for admission
to
resident 
of  a  person,  not 
membership of that division.
(f) Each  branch  may  specify  conditions  for  admission
of  a  person,  not  resident  in  that  branch's  area,  to
membership of that branch.
(g) A  person  may  choose  not  to  be  a  member  of  any
division  and/or  branch  and  in default must be enrolled
in  a  division  and/or  branch  on  the  basis  of  that
member's residential address.

that  division, 

is  entitled 

in 

4.6  Rights and responsibilities of a member

Members  shall  be  entitled,  subject  to  the  Party's 
Constitution and Regulations, to: 
• Have  equal  say  in  the  determination  of  the  Party's
policies  and,  as  far  as  is  practicable,  be  consulted
over their application to legislation;

4 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

• Seek  election  to  Party  office  and  participate  in  the
election  of  the  Party's  office  bearers,  including  its
Parliamentary leaders;

• Attend  as  observers  any  meeting  of  a  Party  body
which  that  body  has  not  declared  "in  camera";  and
participate in such meetings at the discretion of the
body involved.

4.7  Each  member  shall  be  bound,  except  as  otherwise 
specified  by  or  determined  under  the  Constitution  or 
Regulations, to: 
• Uphold and comply with the Party's Constitution and

Regulations

• Uphold and comply with decisions made by ballot of
the members of the Party, or the member's division
or branch.

4.8  Members  must  not  act  against  the  interests  of  the 

Party and, in particular, must not: 
• Falsely state or give the impression that a person is
the  Party,  whether
an  endorsed  candidate  of 
directly,  or  by  the  use  of  the  word  "Democrat"  or  a
similar word;

• Represent themselves as speaking on behalf of the
Party,  a  Division  or  a  branch,  unless  authorised  to
do  so  by  the  relevant  governing  body  or  the  body
assigned this responsibility by such governing body;

• Malign or misrepresent any other member.
• Disclose  sensitive  information  gained  by  virtue  of

Party membership, unless required by law.
4.9  A  member  shall  be  permitted  to  communicate  directly 
or  indirectly  with  the  news  media  concerning  the 
internal affairs of a Branch, a Division or the Party only 
as  formally  authorised  by  the  governing  body  of  such 
the  National  Executive, 
Branch  or  Division  or 
respectively. 

4.11  Responsibilities of office-bearers and candidates 

(a) A  member  who  holds  Party  office  or  the  Party's
endorsement  as  a  candidate  for  public  office  must
carry  out  the  responsibilities  of  the  position  in  the
Party's interests.
(b) On  the  basis  of  a  complaint  to  which  the  member
concerned has had adequate opportunity to respond:
(c) A  member  who  holds  branch,  divisional  or  party
office  may  be  found  by  the  governing  body  of  that
member's  branch  or  division  or  by  the  National
Disputes  Committee  to  have  failed  to  carry  out  the
responsibilities  of  the  office  to  such  an  extent,  or  to
have carried them out in such a way, that such branch
or  division  or  the  party  has  been  or  probably  will  be
seriously disadvantaged;
(d) A member who holds party endorsement for public
office  may  be  found  by  the  governing  body  of  that
member's  division  or  by 
the  National  Disputes
the
failed 
Committee 
responsibilities  of  the  position  to  such  an  extent,  or  to
have carried them out in such a way, that the party has
been or probably will be seriously disadvantaged.

to  carry  out 

to  have 

4.12  Life Membership 

(a)  Life  Membership  shall  entitle  the  holder  of  this
award  to  membership  in  the  Party  for  life  without
fee  while  retaining  all  rights  and  privileges  of  fee-
paying membership.

(b) Life  Membership  may  be  awarded  by  the  National
Executive  for  service  rendered  to  the  Party  but
only by two thirds majority vote of voting members
of  the  Executive  after  due  notice  of  candidature
has been provided.

(c)  Candidates 

for  Life  Membership  shall  be
nominated by their Divisional governing body or by
the  National  Executive  with  the  agreement,  in
writing,  of  the  appropriate  Divisional  governing
body.

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 6 ---

(d)  Any  member  of 

the  Party  may  recommend
candidates  for  Life  Membership  to  a  Divisional
governing body.

(e) Details  of  the  service  rendered  to  the  Party  shall
accompany  any  nomination  of  candidate  to  the
National Executive and shall contain both a history
of the service and an evaluation of its worth to the
Party.

DIVISION ORGANISATION

5 
5.1  The  general  membership  of  the  Party  in  each  Division 
shall establish their own rules for the good governance 
of  the  Party  within  each  Division,  provided  that  such 
rules comply with the National Constitution. 

5.2 Divisions are subject to establishment and dissolution by 

the National Executive  

5.3  The  structure  of  each  Divisional  Governing  Body  must 

allow for: 

a)

regional  branches  to  be  directly  represented  on

Divisional Governing Bodies

b) direct  election  of  the  Divisional  President  by  members

of the Division

c) the Divisional structure to reflect the National structure
standard  nomenclature  of  positions  and

and 
committees

d) compliance with National incorporation
e) provision for elected Federal, State, Territory and Local

Government representatives to be included

f) The  Divisional  may  preclude  parliamentarians  from
the  Divisional

holding  other  voting  positions  on 
Governing Body

5.4 Provided that the previous clauses of section 5 are met,
the  general  membership  of  the  party  in  each  division
shall:

(a) elect  a  Division  Executive  constituted  in  such  a
manner  as  the  membership  of  that  Division  shall
determine,

(b) constitute,  elect  or  ratify  such  regional  or  local
organisations and office bearers as the members of that
division may determine,

(c) draw  up  and  adopt  a  division  Constitution  which  shall
be  amendable  by  the  general  membership  of  that
division, and which shall comply in all respects with the
National Constitution.

6 

NATIONAL ORGANISATION

NATIONAL ORGANISATION

6.
6.1  National Executive
There shall be a National Executive of the Party which shall
comprise the following voting members:

a) National President, elected annually by party ballot.
b) five Deputy National Presidents, elected concurrently

by proportional representation in the annual ballot of all
members;

c) The Presidents of each Division, elected annually by

the members of their respective Division

d) the Federal Parliamentary Leader and Deputy Leader
e) the Young Australian Democrats National President
(elected by and from members under the age of 30
years annually).

6.2 A State or Territory Parliamentary representative shall 

be a non-voting member of National Executive elected by 
and from State and Territory Parliamentarians annually  
6.3 The National Executive shall have a quorum if at least 

half of the voting members, provided at least three of the 
Presidential Team and at least three of the divisional 
representatives (or their proxies) are present.” 

6.4 the following National Office Bearers are non-voting 

members of the National Executive: 
a) National Secretary
b) National Treasurer
c) National Campaign Director

5 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

d) National Policy Coordinator
e) National Communications Officer

6.5  Eligibility 
(a) Eligibility to nominate for a voting position on the National
Executive  shall  be  confined  to  those  members  whose
membership  has  been  current  for  at  least  twelve  (12)
months as at the date of close of nominations.

(b) All  candidates  for  the  National  Executive  shall  disclose
membership  of  any  other  political  party  before  the  ballot
or appointment.

(c) Eligibility to nominate for a voting position on the National
Office  Bearer  position  shall  be  confined 
those
members  whose  membership  is  current  at  the  time  of
appointment.

to 

(d) No  member  is  eligible  to  hold  more  than  one  voting
position  on  the  National  Executive.  In  the  event  a
member  becomes  elected  to  two  (2)  voting  positions  on
the  National  Executive  the  member is entitled to choose
which position they may hold.

6.6  Proxies 
(a) Division Executives have the power to appoint proxies

for their representatives.

(b) The Federal Parliamentary Leader and Deputy may

appoint another federal Parliamentarian (or each other)
as a proxy for all or part of a meeting.

(c) The National President and the Deputy National

Presidents are not authorised to appoint proxies.
(d) A proxy must be a person and must physically be

present at the meeting at which the sitting member
he/she represents cannot be present.

(e) A proxy must be accredited with the National Executive
by written notice of such appointment from the Division
Executive.

(f) Such accreditation can be valid for one or more

meetings, the number of meetings the accreditation is
valid for to be specified in the written notice to the
National Executive.

(g) No prior notice will be necessary, it will be sufficient to

bring the accreditation to the meeting.

(h) The proxy may be a member of any Division. A proxy

must be a financial member of the Party and may be a
current voting member of the National Executive.

(i) No member may carry two proxies.

6.7  National Officers 
The National Officers are: 
(a) National Membership Officer
(b) National Ballots Administrator
(c) National Returning Officer
(d) National Journal Editor
(e) National Registrar (appointed on the recommendation of

the National Disputes Committee)

(f) Auditors (members of a professional auditing body)
(g) Party Agent
(h) Registered Officer

Terms of Office 

6.8 
(a) An election for President and Deputy Presidents shall be
conducted  by  the  Returning  Officer  in  sufficient  time  for
the  results  to  be  announced  by  15th  June  in  each  year
and  those  elected  will  assume  office  on  1st  July  in  that
year and shall hold office until 30th June in the following
year.

(b) A  replacement  election  shall  be  conducted  by  the
Returning  Officer  in  the  event  of  a  casual  vacancy  in  in
office of the President unless the casual vacancy occurs
within  the  last  six  months  of  the  term  of  office  in  which
case  the  Senior  Deputy  President  shall  become  Acting
President for the remainder of the term.

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 7 ---

(c)

In the event of a casual vacancy in a position of Deputy
President,  a  countback  of  the  previous  ballot  shall  be
conducted to fill the vacant position(s).

(d) The  National  Office  Bearers  shall  be  appointed  by  the

National executive for two year terms

(e) National Office Bearers may be removed by a vote of an
absolute  majority  of  the  National  Executive,  notice  of
which  must  be  given  to  the  office  bearer  and  the
National  Executive  at  least  fourteen  days  prior  to  the
vote.

6.8  National Executive Duties and Responsibilities 
(a) To  direct,  organise  and  co-ordinate  as  required  by  the
membership, the policies, functions and administration of
the Party, in accordance with the Constitution.

(b) National Executive is precluded from expending amounts
from the party’s reserve funds to meet ordinary running
expenses  of  the  party,  with  the  exception  of:  Legal
expenses,  General  federal  election  expenses,  and
investments.

COMMITTEES 
The  day-to-day  conduct  of 

7 
the  Party's  national 
7.1 
activities  shall  be  administered  by  such  Committees  as 
National Executive establishes by regulations. 

7.1.1 There shall be the following standing committees of 

the National Executive: 

(a) National Campaign Committee
(b) National Policy Committee
(c) National Finance and Administration Committee
(d) National Membership Committee
(e) National Communications Committee
(f) National Constitution Review Committee
7.1.2 The National Campaign Committee shall:
(a) comprise:

(i) National Campaign Director (as convenor)
(ii) Parliamentary Leader (or their nominee)
(iii) National President
(iv) National Secretary
(v) Political Research Officer

(b) have the following responsibilities:

(i) All campaign related matters, including election
campaigns and campaigning between elections

Issues based campaigns or targeted campaigns

(ii)
(iii) Assistance and advice to state campaigns
(iv) Strategy and political positioning
(v) Liaison with divisional campaign directors
(vi) Liaison with party room

7.1.3 The National Finance and Administration Committee 

shall: 

(a) comprise:

(i) National President (as convenor)
(ii) National Treasurer
(iii) National Secretary
(iv) Senior Deputy National President
(v) 2 National Deputy Presidents, as appointed by

National Executive

(vi) The National Fundraising Officer (non-voting)

(b) have the following responsibilities:

(i) All finance related matters
(ii) Financial advice to National Executive
(iii) Budgets and budget predictions
(iv) Liaison with divisional treasurers
(v) Ballots and timelines for ballots
(vi) General record keeping
(vii) Ensuring that all other administrative tasks and

processes are completed in an accurate and timely
manner

(viii) Approving minor financial commitments as

delegated by national executive.

7.1.4 The National Membership Committee shall: 
(a) comprise:

(i) Senior Deputy National President (as convenor)

6 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

(ii) National President
(iii) National Secretary
(iv) Membership Officer
(v) YADs National President

(b) have the following responsibilities:

(i) Membership lists
(ii) Renewals and resignations
(iii) Servicing members
(iv) Co-ordination of contacting new and lapsing

members

(v) strategies for member retention and membership

drives 

(vi) Liaison with divisional membership officers
(vii) Membership development
(viii) Approval of membership enrolment (section

4.1.5A)

7.1.5 The National Policy Committee shall: 
(a) comprise:

(i) National Policy Co-ordinator (as convenor)
(ii) National President
(iii) National Secretary
(iv) A Deputy National President, appointed by

National Executive

(v) Parliamentary Leader (or nominee)
(vi) Deputy Parliamentary Leader (or nominee)
(vii) A State Parliamentarian

(b) have the following responsibilities:
(i) Creation of National policies
(ii)

Implementation of an inclusive, democratic and

consultative policy formulation process

(iii) Membership and community consultation
(iv) Liaison with relevant portfolio holders and party

room

(v) Liaison with divisional policy officers
(vi) Appointment of policy stream co-ordinators
(vii) Oversight of policy balloting process

7.1.6 The National Communications Committee shall 
(a)

comprise:

(i) National Communications Officer (as convenor)
(ii) National President
(iii) National Secretary
(iv) A Deputy National President, as appointed by

National Executive

(v) Deputy Parliamentary Leader (or nominee)
(vi) National Journal Editor
(vii) IT Coordinator

(b)

have the following responsibilities

(i) Creation and implementation of a national

communication strategy that maximises member
participation and input in the party
(ii) Creation of the national journal
(iii) All I.T. matters, including website development and

email lists

(iv) Liaison with divisional journal editors
(v) developing the agenda for national conference,
subject to approval by the National Executive

(vi) ensuring that members are informed as early as
possible of the date, venue and agenda of national
conference

(vii) organising events as determined by the National

Executive.

7.1.7 The Constitution Review Committee shall: 
(a) comprise:

(i) National Secretary (as convenor)
(ii) National President
(iii) Three members appointed by National Executive

(b) have the following responsibilities:

(i) analysing and drafting proposed changes to the

constitution and regulations as referred by National
Executive or of its own initiative

(ii) maintaining a data base of all divisional

constitutions and advising National Executive on any
issues that may arise

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 8 ---

(iii) monitoring the compliance of the party’s rules with

any legal requirements.

7.2  All  Committees  of  the  National  Executive  shall  be 
directed by, and responsible to, the National Executive. 
7.3  Quorum  for  any  Committee  shall  be  at  least  half  the 

voting membership of the committee. 

8.
GRIEVANCES, DISPUTES AND APPEALS
8.1  Members  who  become  involved  in  a  dispute  with  each
other  must  take  all  practicable  steps  to  resolve  it 
between  themselves,  if  necessary  with  the  help  of  a 
mutually acceptable conciliator.  

8.2 National Registrar 
(a) There  shall  be  a  National  Registrar  who  must  not  hold
any  other  positions  within  the  party  and  must  have
demonstrated  understanding  of  the  party  processes
and ethos and an ability to facilitate conciliation.

(b) Disputes  in  the  first  instance  will  be  presented  to  the

National Registrar.

8.3 Grounds For a Dispute must be that 
a) the conduct at issue:
(i)

significantly  disadvantaged  the  appellant  or  the  party;
and

(ii) was either improper or unreasonable; or
b) a  member  has  acted  against  the  interests  of  the  party

(i)

either by:
failing 
Constitution or Regulations; or

to  comply  with 

the 

requirements  of 

the

(ii) some other conduct (conduct is improper if it breaches
valid  constitutional  or  other 
is
manifestly  unjust  or  works  against  the  best  interest  of
the party); or

formal  provisions, 

c) a  member  who holds branch, divisional or party office or
holds  party  endorsement  for  public  office  has  failed  to
carry  out  the  responsibilities  of  the  position  to  such  an 
extent,  or  to  have carried them out in such a way, that 
such  branch  or  division  or  the  party  has  been  or 
probably will be seriously disadvantaged; or 

d) the conduct of a Divisional Dispute Committee has failed to
comply  with  the  requirements  of  the  Constitution  or
Regulations, or was improper. 

8.4 Any individual member may lodge a dispute under 8.3a) 
or  8.3.d);  A  Divisional  governing  body,  the  National 
Executive,  a  Parliamentary  Team  or  10  members  from 
any Division may lodge a dispute under 8.3b) & 8.3c) 
8.5  In  general,  disputes  must  be  lodged  with  the  Registrar 
within  14  days  of  the  action  in  dispute  taking  place.  If 
this  can  be 
special  circumstances  are  warranted 
extended to 30 days. 

the  declaration  of 

8.6 In the case of ballots a dispute must be lodged within 3 
days while the ballot is still underway or within 24 hours 
after 
If  special 
circumstances  are  warranted  this  can  be  extended  to 
48  hours.  A  ballot  is  taken  to  be  declared  when  the 
President  and  Secretary  are  informed.  The  Secretary 
has responsibility to inform interested parties.  

the  ballot. 

8.7  Upon  presentation  of a dispute to the Registrar, he/she 

must determine:  

a) if the dispute is frivolous or vexatious; if this is the finding
the dispute must be dismissed and the appellant only is
to be notified; or 

b) if  there  is  a  prima  facie  case;  if  this  is  the  finding  all
relevant  parties  must  be  informed  and  advised  of  the
next steps in the process 

8.8  The  Registrar’s  determination  must  be  made  within  14 
days,  or  within  3  days  in  the  case  of  ballots  or  if  the 
claim is taken to be a matter of urgency. Any interested 
party  may  request  that  the  matter  be  considered  as 
urgent and the Registrar will make any determination as 
is  appropriate,  taking  into  account  the  nature  of  the 
dispute and political implications. 

7 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

8.9  When  a  prima  facie  case  exists  the  Registrar  must 
to  mediation  as  soon  as 

the  dispute 

progress 
practicable 

8.10  If  mediation  fails  or  does not take place, the Registrar 
makes a detailed report to the Convenor of the National 
Disputes Committee. 

8.11  There  shall  be  a  National  Disputes  Committee  which 
shall  comprise:  National  Convenor  and  Divisional 
Disputes  Convenors,  who  shall  hold  no  other  positions 
within the party. 

8.12  The  National  Disputes  Convenor  shall  be  elected  by 
the  membership  every  two  years,  and  shall  hold  no 
other positions in the party. 

8.13  The  National  Disputes  Committee  will  deal  with 
disputes  in  a  timely  manner,  and  has  the  power  to 
gather  its  own  evidence  and  to  hear  from  all  parties  in 
the  dispute.  Each  dispute  must  be  considered  by  at 
least three members of the Committee, selected by the 
Convenor  on  a  rotational  basis,  having  regard  to 
availability and possible conflicts of interest.  

8.14 The National Disputes Committee shall operate on the 
principles of dispute resolution and natural justice. 
8.15  The  National  Disputes  Convenor  shall  report  the 
Committee’s  findings  to  the  National  Executive,  with 
recommendations for action.  

8.16  If  the  National  Disputes  Committee  finds  that  the 

dispute was valid the Committee may, 
a) in accordance with the gravity of the breach:
(i) take no further action;
(ii) issue a directive;
(iii) issue a reprimand or an advice to the member on future

conduct;

b) In    more  serious  cases,  recommend  to  the  National
Executive  that  any  or  all  of  the  following  rights  of  the
member  be  suspended  in  whole  or  in  part,  for  a
specified or indefinite period:

(i) the period of grace of a member whose subscription has

expired;

(ii) seeking  or  holding  national,  divisional  and/or  branch

office;

(iii)seeking  or  retaining  endorsement  of  the  party  for  public

office;

(iv) speaking on behalf of the party;
(v) attending or participating in meetings of party bodies;
(vi) Membership of the party.
c) In the case of a ballot the Committee may, in accordance

with the gravity of the breach:

(i) Take no further action:
(ii) Provide advice on the conduct of future ballots;
(iii) Order a recount of the ballot
(iv) Order the ballot to be redone
8.17  A  decision  or  ballot  result  will  stand  while  a  dispute  is

being considered.  

8.18  The  National  Executive  must  accept  the  finding  of  the 
National  Disputes  Committee  and  shall  consider  only 
whether the punishment proposed by the Committee is 
in  accordance  with  the  gravity  of  the  breach,  or  some 
other  punishment  is  appropriate.  The  decision  of  the 
National Executive shall be final. 

8.19  Any  findings  and  recommendations  of  the  National 
Disputes  Committee  must  be  reported  to  the  National 
Executive,  and  be  made  available  to  the  relevant 
members.  A  record  of  such  reports  shall  be  made 
available  to  members  on  request,  while  protecting  the 
identity of the parties involved in any particular matter.   
8.20  The  Registrar  shall  refer  all  disputes  relating  to 
parliamentarians,  parliamentary  performance  or  public 
comments  made  by  parliamentarians  to  the  relevant 
Parliamentary Team, or where the Team is less than 3 
parliamentarians,  to  the  National  Executive,  and  not  to 
the National Disputes Committee in the first instance. 
8.21 If the matter cannot be satisfactorily resolved within the 
Parliamentary  Team  it  can  then  be  referred  to  the 

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 9 ---

National  Disputes  Committee 
resolution.  The 
Committee  shall  have  regard  to  the  Parliamentary 
Team’s report on the matter. 

for 

POLICY FORMULATION

9 
9.1  Policies  shall  be 

formulated  with 

the  maximum 
participation  of  members  and  shall 
finally  be 
determined  by  the  direct  and  equal  say  of  the 
membership by a voluntary postal vote. 

9.1.1  A policy ballot shall be determined by a simple majority 

of those voting in such ballot. 

9.1.2  Regulation removed by ballot declared on 28/03/2002 
9.1.3  Petitions  to  change  policy  and  initiated  after  the 
publication  of  the  first  draft  of  a  policy  and  up  to 
twelve  months  after  a  ballot  has  occurred  will  not 
proceed unless endorsed by the National Executive. 
9.1.4  Petitions seeking to initiate a party ballot on a matter of 
policy  will  lapse  should  the  National  Policy  Co-
ordinator initiate a policy review through the Journal, 
provided  the  review  clearly  allows  for  discussion  of 
the petitioners' request. 

9.1.5  Petitions initiated to change policy must: 

(a) Refer to a specific policy item or items of policy;
(b) Be  accompanied  by  a  copy  of  the  policy  as
proposed by the petition;
(c) Have  been  discussed  with  the  National  Policy  Co-
ordinator  in  relation  to  wording  and  structure  prior  to
circulation.

9.2  Policies  which  concern  one  Division  only  may  be 
decided  by  the  Division  concerned  by  the  procedures 
outlined in the Regulations. 

9.3  Emergency  policy  decisions  can  be  made  by  the 
National  Executive.    Any  such  decision  shall  be 
submitted  for  ratification  by  party  ballot  within  two 
months.      The  National  Executive  shall  not  make  any 
emergency policy decision which contradicts any policy 
of the Party already approved by a ballot of members. 

10  FUNDING
10.1  The  party  shall  abide  by  all  relevant  laws  including 

electoral and association laws. 

10.2  National  membership  fees  and  Journal  subscriptions 

shall be:  
(a) set,  collected  and  recorded  by 
Executive,
(b) distributed  between 

organisations  on  a  basis  and 
determined by the National Executive.

the  National  and  Division
in  proportions

the  National

11  PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION

New Member Representation 
11.1A  A person holding elected public office may apply to be 
enrolled as a member in accordance with the provision 
of this constitution. 

11.1B  A  member  who  holds  an  elected  public  office  must 
belong to the parliamentary party which corresponds to 
that  office  if  the  member  has  been  preselected  by  the 
Party for that or an equivalent elected public office. 
11.1C A  person  who  is  not  enrolled  as  a  member  and  who 
holds  an  elected  public  office  may  apply  for  a  special 
endorsement where such endorsement: 
the  person 
(a) entitles 

the
parliamentary  party  corresponding  to  their  elected
their  being  enrolled  as  a
public  office  upon 
member;

to  membership  of 

(b) may  be  granted  to  the  person  by  resolution  of  a
committee  comprising  of  the  president,  deputy
presidents  and  parliamentary  members  of  the
the
executive,  and 
executive  who  are  members  of  the  division  which

those  voting  members  of 

8 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

encompasses 
seeking special endorsement; 

the  electorate  of 

the  applicant 

(c) must  be  deliberated  in  camera  and  the  results  of
such  deliberations  kept  confidential  until  such  time
as the applicant for special endorsement should be
enrolled as a member;

(d) may only be granted by a vote supported by at least
three  quarters  of  those  deliberating  the  application
for special endorsement;

(e) must  be  construed  as  fulfilling  all  requirements  of
the  Party  leading  to  preselection  for  an  elected
public  office  equivalent  to  that  which  the  applicant
already 
special
endorsement  may  not  supplant  any  part  of  the
preselection process which is comprised of a ballot
of members.

except 

holds 

such 

that 

11.2  Pre-selection 

No member may stand as a candidate for election to a 
National  Parliament  without 
the 
relevant  Division  Executive  or  a  committee  appointed 
by  the  relevant  Division  Executive  or  elected  by  the 
members in that division. 

the  approval  of 

11.2.1 Subject to clause 11.2, and if the Division's constitution 
does  not  contain  appropriate  provisions,  the Divisional 
governing  body  may  endorse  candidates 
for  an 
electorate  in  the  division  after  an  election  has  been 
called,  if  in  their  opinion  it  is  impracticable  for  a 
member  to  be  endorsed  as  a  candidate  under  the 
Division's Constitution. 

11.2.2 No  candidate  endorsed  under  these  Regulations  can 
be  placed  ahead  of  a  candidate  endorsed  under  the 
Division's  Constitution  without  the  latter's  consent, 
except  if  such  placement  occurs  under  Regulation 
11.2.38. 

Candidate Assessment Committee
11.2.3 Each  Division  shall  have  a  Candidate  Assessment 
for  determining 
Committee  which 
whether  to  approve  or  disapprove  each  candidate  as 
suitable for endorsement for public office. 

responsible 

is 

11.2.4 The Candidate Assessment Committee shall comprise 
at  least  four  members.    Each  Division  shall  determine 
the actual number of members. 

11.2.5 A  majority  of  members  of  the  Candidate  Assessment 
Committee  shall  be  elected  by 
the  Divisional 
membership  using  the  quota  preferential  method  of 
proportional  representation.    Other  members  of  the 
Candidate  Assessment  Committee  shall  be  appointed 
by,  and  from,  the  Divisional  governing  body.    These 
appointees may appoint proxies. 

11.2.6 The  Candidate  Assessment  Committee  shall  elect  its 
own convenor, who shall have a deliberate vote and a 
casting vote in the event of a tied vote. 

11.2.7 The  quorum  of  a  meeting  of 

the  Candidate 
Assessment  Committee  shall  be  the  majority  of  its 
members. 

11.2.8 The  members  of 

the  Candidate  Assessment 
Committee  shall  have  two  years  continuous  Party 
membership 
their  date  of 
appointment. 

immediately  preceding 

11.2.9 Serving Parliamentarians  are ineligible to be members 

of the Candidate Assessment Committee. 

11.2.10 The  term  of  office  of  the  Candidate  Assessment 
Committee  shall  be  two  years,  except  that  the  term 
may be extended by the Divisional governing body, if 
in their opinion the changing of the membership of the 
Candidate Assessment Committee at that time would 
unduly hinder its ability to manage its workload. 
11.2.11 There  is  no  limit  on  the  length  of  time  a  person  may 
the  Candidate  Assessment 

be  a  member  of 
Committee. 

11.2.12 If  the  Division's  rules  do  not  contain  appropriate 
the  Divisional  Governing  body  shall 

provisions, 

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 10 ---

appoint  a  member  to  fill  a  casual  vacancy  on  the 
Candidate Assessment Committee. 

11.2.13 If a member of the Candidate Assessment Committee 
does  not  remain  impartial,  the  Divisional  governing 
body may declare their position vacant. 

11.2.14 No member of the Candidate Assessment Committee 
may  consider  an  application  for  endorsement  which 
involves  a  member  of  their  household  or  in  whose 
endorsement they have an interest. 
Endorsement (incl. half-Senate and full-Senate teams)
11.2.15 The  Divisional  governing  body  shall  have 

the 
authority  to  open  nominations  and  set  dates  for  the 
preselection  process  for  all  local  and  State  elections 
covered by the Division.  This includes whether or not 
the  Party  will  stand  candidates  in  local  or  State 
elections/by-elections. 

11.2.16 The  National  Executive  has  the  authority  to  decide 
whether  the  Party  stands  candidates  in  specific 
Federal electorates.  This includes by-elections. 
11.2.17 The  National  Executive  has  the  authority  to  direct  a 
Divisional  governing  body 
to  set  dates  and 
commence  preselection  processes  if  it  is  deemed 
necessary.    This  includes  directing  a  Divisional 
governing  body  to  commence  the ballot to determine 
the  Senate  teams  for  half  and  full-Senate  (double-
dissolution) elections. 

11.2.18 The Divisional governing body has the responsibility 
to call for nominations and to set procedures for the 
endorsement  process.    In  the  case  of  federal 
electorates  and  Senate  teams,  this  may  not  occur 
until  National  Executive  has  authorised 
the 
commencement of the preselection process. All pre-
selection  procedures  must  be  consistent  with  this 
Constitution  and  its  Regulations  and  any  other 
directives  of  National  Executive.    The  Divisional 
governing  body  shall  also  determine  the  number  of 
candidates  the  Party  will  endorse  for  any  multi-
member electorates. 

in  urgent  cases,  or 

11.2.19 Nominations  shall  be  called  for  in  the  Divisional 
newsletter  or  by  mail 
the 
provisions  of  the  constitution  of  a  division  may  deem 
that the public announcement of a casual vacancy for 
for 
a  parliamentary  position  constitutes  a  call 
nominations  provided  that  such  provisions  state  by 
when,  and  to  where,  such  nominations  must  be 
lodged. 

be 
in 

suitable 
the 

to 
included 

11.2.20 Only  those  members  assessed  by  the  Candidate 
for 
team  of 

Assessment  Committee 
endorsement  may  be 
candidates for elections for multi-member elections. 
11.2.21 The Divisional governing body may determine that 
only a particular number of positions on the Party’s 
team for multi-member elections shall be filled by 
party ballot, provided that the minimum number of 
positions to be filled by ballot shall be the top two 
positions for a half-Senate election and the top three 
positions for a full-Senate election.  The minimum 
number of positions which must be balloted must 
equate to the number of positions which could be 
considered winnable. 

11.2.21a If a vacancy occurs for  a winnable position in the 
Party’s team for a multi-member electorate, it shall 
be filled by a reballot for that position and all lower 
positions which could be considered winnable.  If 
National Executive (in the case of a Senate team) 
or the Divisional governing body (in the case of 
state or local council electorates) determines there 
is insufficient time to hold a ballot of members, the 
vacancy(s) shall be filled be a recount of the most 
recent ballot for the team. 

11.2.22 Other  positions  on  the  team  for  elections  for  multi-
member  elections  may  be  filled  by  the  Divisional 
governing  body  as  required  to  give  a  politically 

9 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

balanced  team.    These  people  must  have  been 
assessed  as  suitable  by  the  Candidate  Assessment 
Committee.    Any  vacancy  which  occurs  for  these 
positions  may  be  filled  by  the  Divisional  governing 
body. 

11.2.23 Only  those  members  assessed  by  the  Candidate 
Assessment  Committee 
for 
endorsement  shall  be  included  in  a  pre-selection 
ballot  for  multi-member  electorates  sent  to  members. 
The  positions  on  a  team  for  multi-member  elections 
shall  be  filled  by  the  quota  preferential  method  of 
proportional representation with ranking. 

suitable 

be 

to 

11.2.24 The  Candidate  Assessment  Committee  must 
interview  all  first  time  applicants  for  endorsement, 
provided  that  the  interview  may  be  waived  for 
members  who  have  previously  been  endorsed  as  a 
candidate by the Party. 

11.2.25 In  lieu  of  an  interview  -  in  the  case  of  remote  area 
applicant  -  the  Candidate  Assessment  Committee 
may  provide  for  the  return  of  a  detailed  written 
questionnaire, 
telephone  hook-up  or  other  such 
procedure  as  may  be  determined  by  the  Candidate 
Assessment Committee. 

11.2.26 The  Candidate  Assessment  Committee  or  any  other 
body deemed appropriate by the Divisional governing 
body  shall  provide  each  applicant  with  a  written 
statement  on  their  strengths  and  those  areas  where 
improvement could be made. 

11.2.27 The 

criteria 

for 

assessing 

applications 

for 

endorsement shall include: 

• eligibility to nominate and be elected, according to the
appropriate  Federal  or  State  legislation,  including
citizenship, bankruptcy and criminal record;
• personal qualities;
• party involvement;
• community involvement;
• knowledge of party policy;
• public speaking skills;
• media skills;
• employment history;
• campaigning skills;
• understanding and suitability for Parliamentary work.

11.2.28 The  Candidate  Assessment  Committee  may  deny 
approval for a member to stand as a candidate.   The 
Candidate  Assessment  Committee  must  be  able  to 
justify 
the 
evaluation of applicants. 

its  decision  against 

the  criteria 

for 

11.2.29 An  applicant  denied  approval  for  endorsement  may 
re-apply to the Candidate Assessment Committee for 
re-assessment once. 

11.2.30 If  after  re-assessment  the  applicant  is  still  aggrieved 
then further appeal may be made through the normal 
the 
processes 
respective Divisional appeals committee. 

resolving  disputes  namely, 

for 

Withdrawal of endorsement
11.2.31 If  significant  concerns  regarding  the  performance  of 
an  endorsed  candidate  are  raised  the  Candidate 
Assessment  Committee  and/or 
the  Divisional 
governing body is required to address such matters. 

11.2.32 The  Candidate  Assessment  Committee  can  initiate 
withdrawal  of  endorsement  by 
the  Divisional 
governing  body  at  any  time  up  to  the  election  date. 
This must be agreed to by a three-quarter majority of 
the Divisional governing body. 

11.2.33 A Divisional governing body may initiate withdrawal of 
endorsement  or  may  ask  the  Candidate  Assessment 
to  re-assess  an  endorsed  candidate 
Committee 
where it feels this is necessary.  Upon re-assessment 
endorsement may be withdrawn. 

11.2.34 In the case of a House of Representatives candidate, 
the  Candidate  Assessment  Committee  shall  consult 
respective  branch  members  when 
with 
considering the withdrawal of endorsement. 

the 

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 11 ---

Casual Senate vacancy
11.2.35 Where  the  Party  is  required  to  present  a  nomination 
to  the  respective  State  Governor  for  the  filling  of  a 
casual  Senate  vacancy,  the  procedures  given  in  this 
Constitution  for  the  selection  of  Senate  candidates 
shall apply. 

11.2.36 If  an  absolute  majority  of  the  National  Executive 
determines  that  there  is  insufficient  time  to  hold  a 
ballot  of  members,  the  casual  Senate  vacancy  shall 
be  filled  by  a  recount  of  the  most  recent  party  ballot 
for a Senate ticket in that state, with the position being 
offered to the highest ranked available candidate from 
that  recounted  ballot.    If  that  person  is  either 
unavailable or unwilling to fill the vacancy, the position 
shall be offered to the next most preferred candidate. 

intervene 

11.2.37 If  the  National  Executive  believes  that  it  would  be  of 
significant benefit to the Party to do so it may, without 
prejudice, 
in  a  Division's  preselection 
process. 
Other Provisions
11.2.38 (This Regulation ceased to apply from 1st June, 1996 ) 
11.2.39 (This clause has been renumbered as 11.2a) 
11.2.40 (This clause has been renumbered as 11.2b) 
11.2.41 Anyone  applying  to  be  a  candidate  for  the  Party  will 
be  required  to  satisfy  the  Candidate  Assessment 
Committee  that  he  does  not  owe  any  money  to  the 
Party. 

Obligations of Candidates
11.2a  Anyone applying to be a candidate for the Party will be 
required  to  give  a  signed  undertaking  regarding  the 
following:  not  to  speak  publicly  against  official  Party 
policy unless there is a genuinely strong conscientious 
objection,  in  which  case  Party  policy  must  be  stated 
first and then any qualification/s can be given. 

11.2b  If  elected  the  candidate  agrees  that  whilst  he  may 
retain  the  right  to  resign  from  the  Party,  if  he  does  so 
he will resign the parliamentary seat beforehand. 

11.3  Conduct of Parliamentary Representatives 

(a) An elected member of Parliament shall adhere to

the policies formulated by this Party:

• except  that  where  the  views  of  an  elected  member
are  in  conflict  with  party  policy,  then  the  elected 
member may vote according to their conscience; 

• and  where,  in  the  opinions  of  an  elected  member,
their duty to their electorate is in conflict with Party 
policy, 
the  elected  member  may  vote 
according to their duty to their electorate. 

then 

(b) When  an  elected  member  recognises  a  conflict
between  either  their  conscience  or  their  duty  to
their  electorate  and  the  Party  policy,  then  they
shall  furnish  a  statement  accounting  for  their
position  to  their  Division  Executive,  for  their
information.

(c) When an elected member votes against the Party
policy,  then  they  shall  at  the  earliest  opportunity,
furnish a statement accounting for the reason why
they so voted to their  division Executive.
11.4  The  Leader  and  Deputy  Leader  of  the  Party  and  the 
Leader  and  Deputy  Leader  of 
the  Australian 
Democrats in each House of the Australian Parliament 
are  elected  from  the  members  of  the  Australian 
Parliament  who  are  endorsed  by 
the  Australian 
Democrats. 

11.4.1 The  Leader  of  the  Party  is  also  the  Leader  of  the 
Australian  Democrats  in  the  House  of  the  Australian 
Parliament of which that person is a member. 

11.4.2 If  the  Leader  and  Deputy  Leader  of  the  Party  are 
members of the same House of Parliament, the Deputy 
Leader  of  the  Party  is  also  the  Deputy  Leader  of  the 
Australian  Democrats  in  that  House;  otherwise  that 
person  is  the  Leader  of  the  Australian  Democrats  in 
the other House. 

10 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

11.5  All  Parliamentary  leaders  must  be  elected  by  Party 
ballot  as  soon  as  is  practicable  after  each  Federal 
election, other than a by-election or an election for one 
House of Parliament in which no candidates endorsed 
by the Australian Democrats are elected. 

11.5.1 Each  parliamentary  leadership  position  is  elected 
separately  by  the  alternative  preferential  system  of 
voting. 

11.5.2 All  members  eligible  for  any  parliamentary  leadership 
position  who  wish  to  be  included  in  the  ballot  must 
nominate. 

11.5.3 The returning officer must retain ballot papers securely 
until the expiry of the term of office to which they relate. 
11.5.4 Senators  newly  elected  to  the  Parliament  in  a  half-
Senate  election  who  gain  leadership  positions  take 
them  up  when  they  take  up  their  seats.    If  necessary 
separate  counts  must  be  conducted  for  the  remainder 
of the current Senate term and the next term. 

11.6  A  parliamentary  leadership  position  may  be  declared 

vacant by: 
• an  absolute  majority  of  those  eligible  to  hold  the
position,
• an absolute majority of the National Executive,
• or 100 members.
A  vacancy  for  any  position  entails  vacancies  for  all
consequent positions.

Manner and Form of a Leadership Petition 
11.6.1  For the purposes of a declaration by 100 members 
that  a 
is  vacant,  such 
leadership  position 
declaration must be in the following form. 
(a) A petition which includes the name, address, signature

and date of signature of each petitioner.

(b) Such  a  petition  must  be  collected  within  a  thirty  day
period, the commencement date being the day the first
signature  is  collected  and  the  concluding  date  being
thirtieth  day  after  the  first  signature  is  signed.    At  the
conclusion  of  the  thirtieth  day  and  if  the  requisite
number  of  signatures  has  been  collected,  the  petition
must be forwarded to the National Ballots Administrator
who shall certify the time and date that the petition was
served  upon 
further
signatures  shall  be  allowed  to  be  entered  on  the
petition.  If after the expiration of 37 days from the date
of the first petition’s signature, the petition has not been
lodged  with  the  National  Ballots  Administrator,  the
petition shall have no effect.

them,  after  which 

time  no 

the  National  Secretary  and 

Upon  certification  by  the  National  Ballots  Administrator,  the 
National  Ballots  Administrator  shall  immediately  inform  the 
Leader and Deputy of the Parliamentary Party, the National 
President, 
the  National 
Membership Officer of the receipt of the petition.  Following 
the  certification  by  the  National  Ballots  Administrator,  the 
National  Membership  Officer  shall  certify,  within  3  working 
days, the veracity of the following matter: 
•

That the required number of members who have signed
the  petition  are  financial  members  of  the  party  of  at
least six months standing and have not otherwise been
excluded  or  resigned  from  membership  or  had  their
voting rights suspended in any way.

A  petition  to  declare  vacant  a  leadership  position  which  is 
received  during  a  Federal  Election  period,  shall  remain 
dormant  during  that  period  and  not  be  further  acted  upon 
until after polling day. 
A petition to initiate a leadership ballot up to twelve months 
after  a  leadership  ballot  has  occurred  shall  not  proceed 
unless endorsed by the National Executive. 
11.6.2 A  casual  vacancy  for  a  Parliamentary  Leadership 
position may be filled by the National Executive for up 
to 3 months. 

Effect of Leadership Petition 
11.6.3  On  the  certification  of  receipt  of  a  petition  by  the 
National  Ballots  Administrator  and  the  National 

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 12 ---

Memberships  Officer  under  regulation  11.6.1  the 
effect of certification shall be as follows: 

(a) The  opening  of  nominations  for  a  leadership  ballot.
Such  nominations  for  leadership  shall  be  open  for  a
minimum of 24 hours and a maximum of thirty days as
determined  by  the  National  Ballots  Administrator  in
consultation with the National President.

(b) To  maintain  the  incumbent/s  in  their  positions  until  the
declaration of the result of the ballot of the membership.
(c) If  only  the  maintained  incumbent  nominates  for  the

declared vacant position, a ballot shall proceed.

11.7  A  casual  vacancy  is  filled  either  by  recount  of  the 
previous  party  ballot  for  the  position,  or  by  fresh  party 
ballot,  as  resolved  by  the  National  Executive.    Any 
person  whose  position  was  expressly  declared  vacant 
is excluded from recounts of previous ballots. 

11.7.1 Casual  vacancies  may,  at  the  request  of  the  National 
Management  Committee,  be  filled  provisionally  by 
recount  of  the  previous  party  ballot  for  the  position(s), 
votes  for  candidates  who  are  no  longer  eligible  or 
available being passed on as indicated by each voter. 

11.7.2 Any position which cannot be filled by recount may be 
filled provisionally by ballot of those eligible to hold the 
position. 

11.7.3 If all vacant positions are provisionally filled by recount 
they may  be confirmed by an absolute majority of the 
National Executive within one month of the declaration 
of the vacancy. 

11.7.4 If  any  vacant  positions  are  not  provisionally  filled  by 
recount  and  confirmed  in  accordance  with  these 
regulations  a  party  ballot  must  be  held  for  all  vacant 
positions as soon as is practicable. 

11.7.5 In  determining  whether  to  confirm  provisionally  held 
positions  National  Executive  must  take  into  account 
the length of the remaining period of the parliamentary 
term. 

12  CONDUCT OF MEMBERS
12.1  Any  member  of  the  Party  who  disagrees  with  a  policy 
or  decision  of  the  Party  shall  remain  wholly  free  to 
express  and  advocate  their  own  views,  except  on 
occasions  when  they  are  communicating  in  a  public 
capacity  as  a  representative  of  the  Party,  in  which 
event  they  may  express  their  own  views,  but  make  it 
clear  that  they  do  not  reflect  those  of  the  general 
membership of the Party. 

13  PUBLICATION  AND  PURPOSES  OF  THE 

JOURNAL

13.1  There  shall  be  published  at  regular  intervals,  not  less 
than  four  times  per  year,  a  Journal  which  shall  be 
circulated  to  all  members  of  the Party as a vehicle for 
communication amongst members and as an impartial 
medium for comment and debate. 

13.2  The  Journal  shall  be 

full 
membership  ballots  shall  be  held.    The  discussion  of 
subjects  to  be  balloted  and  the  ensuing  ballots  shall 
have priority access to the Journal. 

the  means  by  which 

13.3  The  Journal  shall  be  the  responsibility  of  the  Editor 
the  National 

appointed  by,  and  answerable 
Executive. 

to, 

14  CONDUCT OF BALLOTS
14.1  Any  provision  in  this  Constitution  for  elections  by  the 
in  respect  of  any  National 
general  membership 
Executive  or  National  Office  shall  be  construed  as 
requiring  an  election  by  ballot  conducted  through  the 
Journal. 

14.1.0 Purpose of Ballots 
The purposes of ballots are to: 

11 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

a) elect members to Party officer positions, following
a call for nominations published in the National
Journal,

b) making Party Policy
c) amending current Party policy
d) amending this constitution; and
e) any other matters authorised by the Executive
14.1.1. Initiation of Ballot
a) Upon initiation of a ballot the National Ballots
Administrator is to be informed by the National
Secretary, in writing, of the matter to be balloted.
Upon receipt of this Information the National Ballots
Administrator shall consult with the Journal Editor,
National Returning Officer, National Membership
Officer and any other person or body necessary to
achieve the proper conduct of the ballot as provided for
under the National Constitution and these rules.
b) Authority to initiate a ballot:

(i)

in the case of an elected position - are

governed by clauses 6.6 (a) and 6.6 (b) 
of this Constitution and rest with the 
National Ballots Administrator in 
consultation with the National Returning 
Officer; 

(ii) in the case of any other elected position –

rests with the Executive or such officers 
or other rules as it designates; 

(iii)

in the case of any policy issue – rests with the
National Policy Convenor; and

(iv) in the case of any Constitutional amendment –

rests with the convenor of the relevant 
constitution review committee where one 
exists, otherwise with the National 
President acting in accordance with 
Executive resolutions. 

In the event of delays in the publication and/or

Calls for nomination to an elected position shall

14.1.2  Nominations 
a)
be published in the National Journal or where
appropriate, another mechanism which is sent to all
eligible members
b)
The closing date must allow a minimum of
twenty-one (21) days following publication. This does
not apply to nominations for Parliamentary Leadership
positions.
c)
distribution of a Journal carrying a call for nominations
the National Ballots Administrator, in consultation with
the National Returning Officer, may extend the time
during which nominations will be accepted.  Any such
decision must be made prior to the original date for the
close of nominations.  Notice of such decision must be
sent to the National President, National Appeals
Committee Convenor and each of the State head
offices.
d)
Nominations must be received by the National
Ballots Administrator at the postal address or format
specified in the call for nominations by the closing
date. The National Ballots Administrator shall accept
written nomination of a member(s) of the Party
provided that the nominee confirms his/her nomination
in writing within three (3) days of the close of
nominations.
14.1.3  Ballot Paper
a)
up by the Ballots Administrator, upon which the 
member may cast a vote.  
The Ballot Paper may contain a single or multiple
b)
issues(s) for ballot, each with its attendant alternatives,
options or candidates.
c)
accompanied by, such instructions to members as
considered necessary to guarantee the identity of the
voter(s) and secrecy of the ballot.  Such instructions

The Ballot Paper is the written instrument, drawn

The Ballot Paper shall contain or be

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 13 ---

Only one member's vote shall be recorded on a

shall detail the requirements to be satisfied for the 
member's vote to be accepted to the count. 
d)
given ballot paper.  Two such ballot papers shall be
provided to allow joint members to cast their votes.
14.1.4  Return of Votes
The Ballot Paper(s) shall be posted to the Returning
Officer by individual members unless the Returning
Officer clearly specifies other delivery arrangements
(including bulk, fax or individual hand delivery).
14.1.5  Close of Poll
a) All Ballot Papers must be sent to the Returning
Officer before the time specified by the Returning
Officer on the day of close of the poll.  However, Ballot
Papers clearly postmarked prior to the close of the poll
may be admitted to the count provided they are in the
possession of the Returning Officer before the
completion of the count.
b) The closing date for the poll must be at least
twenty-one (21) days from date of posting or
distributing the ballot paper(s).
14.1.6  Security and Count of the Ballot
a) The counting of the Ballot Papers shall be done at
a time and place nominated by the Returning
Officer,

b) The Returning Officer shall advise any member
who should so request of such time and place.

c) Only members nominated by a candidate as

scrutineers shall be eligible to attend the count,

d) Candidates are not permitted to attend any count

of a ballot on which their name appears,

e) The Returning Officer reserves the right to exclude

f)

any person from the count,
It is the responsibility of the Returning Officer to
ensure that all ballot papers are kept in a secure
location and are not opened prior to the
commencement of the count.

14.1.7  Assistance at the Counting 
The Returning Officer may delegate tasks involving the 
eligibility checking of Ballot Papers and their counting 
to persons under his/her direct supervision. 
14.1.8  Voters' Roll 
a) At least one copy of the voters' roll, detailing all
members eligible to vote in a particular ballot, shall be
available to the Returning Officer prior to the
commencement of the eligibility checking.
b) The Returning Officer shall retain the voters' roll
and the Ballot Papers for a period equal to the term of
office in the case of a ballot for elected office or for one
year in the case of a non-election ballot.
c) Any member shall have the right to inspect the
voters' roll by arrangement with and in the presence of
the Returning Officer or Ballots Administrator during
the period in which they are retained.
14.1.9  Electoral Systems
a) Where single positions are to be filled, the
preferential/alternative voting (Ware) system shall be
used, but where two or more positions are to be filled
concurrently or any committee or team, the quota
preferential method of proportional representation shall
be used.  In voting on policy options, the Hallett Rules
of counting (reference: Hoag and Hallett, "Proportional
Representation", appendix 10) shall be employed.
b)
be optional.  No vote shall be deemed informal by
reason only that:

In all elections the allocation of preferences shall

the same preference (other than the first
(i)
preference) has been recorded on the ballot
paper for more than one candidate or option, but
the Ballot Paper shall be treated as if those
preferences and any subsequent preferences
had not been recorded on the ballot paper; or

12 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

there is a break in the order of preferences

(ii)
recorded on the ballot paper, but the ballot paper
shall be treated as if any subsequent
preferences had not been recorded on the ballot
paper.
(iii)
only where a voter’s clear intent can be
established by the returning officer.
For all elections using the quota-preferential

the published ballot paper was not used but

Should ranking be required following an election

c)
method of proportional representation the Returning
Officer shall follow the rules of the Proportional
Representation Society of Australia as printed in the
Society's manual.
d)
by the quota-preferential method, all unsuccessful
candidates shall be excluded and the voted recounted
as for an election for one position by the preferential
alternative vote method to give a winner; and excluding
the winner and the votes redistributed and the process
may be repeated until all successful candidates are
ranked in order.

14.2  On any ballot it shall be the duty of the National Ballots 
Administrator  to  prepare  and  distribute  the  ballot 
papers and to do so in such a manner as to ensure: 
(a) that no member of the Party who is entitled to vote
is deprived of a ballot paper.
(b) that only ballot papers of members of the Party who
are entitled to vote are counted.
(c) that  no  member  of  the  Party  shall  vote  more  than
once in any one ballot.
for  voting 

the  basis  of  current 

in  party  elections  shall  be 
determined  on 
financial 
membership  of  the  Australian  Democrats,  as  per  the 
national  membership  list  supplied  by  the  National 
Membership  Officer,  and  subject  to  the  constraints  of 
the National Constitution. 

14.2.1 Eligibility 

14.3  The  National  Ballots  Administrator  may  distribute 
appropriate  ballot  papers  at  a  National  Conference, 
which  ballot  papers  may  be  returned  either  at  the 
National  Conference  or  by  post  and  they  shall  be 
counted with ballot papers returned from the Journal. 

is  valid  only 

14.4  A decision made by a majority of members voting in a 
if  such  majority 

non-elective  ballot 
constitutes at least 3% of the eligible membership. 
14.4A  The  outcome of a ballot, or part of a ballot, must take 
effect as and from the date on which the ballot closed 
unless some other later date has been specified in this 
constitution,  in  the  regulations  or  as  part  of  the 
substance of the ballot question itself. 

14.5  The results of a ballot of the membership, as declared 

by the National Returning Officer, must be: 
(a) considered  definitive  as  to  the  opinion  of  the

membership;

(b) binding on all members officers and bodies of the
Party  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  this
Constitution;

(c) deemed to be effective from the date on which the
ballot closed or such later date as may have been
specified in the ballot itself; and

(d) published in the Journal as soon as possible after

the result of the ballot has been declared.
14.5.1 The  National  Returning  Officer  and  National  Ballots 
Administrator  may  together  declare  a  ballot  to  be 
internally inconsistent or incapable of providing a clear 
indication  of  the  opinion  of  the  members  voting  in  the 
ballot,  and  in  doing  so  must  recommend  to  the 
National  Executive  that  the  ballot  be  redrafted  or 
reballoted  as  provided  for  within  clause  14.6.    Action 
cannot be taken under this clause once the results of a 
ballot  have  been  declared  by  the  National  Returning 
Officer. 

14.6  A question which has been determined by membership 
ballot  may  not  be  re-balloted  within  a  period  of  twelve 

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 14 ---

months  following  the  declaration  of  that  ballot,  except 
by  virtue  of  this  Constitution  and  its  regulations,  or  a 
resolution  of  the  executive  of  which  notice  had  been 
given in the Journal. 

14.7  The  provisions  of  the  National  Constitution  relevant  to 
ballots  must  apply  to  ballots  conducted  by  a  division 
except that the result of such a ballot: 
(a)

is only binding on members, officers and bodies of
that  division  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
the division's constitution;

(b) must be declared by the officer of the division who

fills the role equivalent to that of returning officer;

(c) must  be  published  in  the  journal  or  newsletter  or

equivalent publication of the division.

14.8  Except  as  may  be  otherwise  provided  for  in  this 
constitution  and  its  regulations  the  constitution  of  a 
division may specify: 
(a) which  matters  need  to be determined by ballot of

the membership of that division;

(b) which matters are to be determined by procedure

(c)

other than ballot;
the method of counting, the majority required and
such other matters as are relevant to determining
the outcome of a particular ballot; and

In  the  absence  of  such  provisions  in  a  division's 
constitution  the  provisions  of  this  constitution  and  its 
regulations and rules must apply. 

14.9  A  party  ballot  may  be  initiated  by  the  National 
Executive, one division, five branches or fifty members. 
14.10   Voting in all party ballots is open only to persons who 
at the ballot’s closing date have been members of the 
Party for at least six months. 

15  NATIONAL CONFERENCE
15.1  A  National  conference  shall  be  called  by  the  National 

Executive at least every three years. 

15.2  A National Conference shall be called at the request of 
any  three  divisions,  and  shall  be  organised  by  the 
National Executive as soon as possible after receipt of 
that request. 

15.3  A  National  Conference  may  consider  any  matter  put 
before  it,  but  it  shall  consider  the  matters  put  forward 
by its sponsors, either National Executive or Divisions, 
as first priority. 

15.4  National  Conference  may  make  recommendations  in 
regard to policy, the National Constitution, or matters of 
an  administrative  nature,  which,  after  publication  and 
discussion  in  the  National  Journal,  shall  be  put  to  the 
ballot of the membership. 

15.4.1 Any  decisions  at  National  Conference  shall  be 
submitted as recommendations to the full membership 
before implementation. 

16  NATIONAL ELECTORAL ACTIVITY 
16.1  The decisions on allocation of preferences for national 
election  campaign,  including  those  for  the  House  of 
Representatives, the Senate, or by-elections for casual 
vacancies in either House, shall be made by a ballot of 
the  full  membership.    The  membership  may  delegate 
authority  for  any  such  decisions  to  the  National 
Executive or to the relevant State. 
for  National  and  Division 
It  will  be  appropriate 
Executives  to  initiate  general  discussion  and  appoint 
committees  for  the  purpose  of  formulating  statements 
for use in electoral campaigns. 

16.2 

16.3  The  Executive  shall  ensure  that  statements  for  use  in 
electoral  campaigns  are  consistent  with  National 
policy. 

16.4  Voting in ballots concerning the conduct of a campaign 
for  election  to  a  public  office,  including  preference 
allocation  and  candidate  endorsement  ballots,  is  open 
only: 
(a) to persons who at the ballot's closing date:

13 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

• meet  residential  qualifications  for  enrolment  on  the
public  electoral  roll  for  an  electorate  to  which  the 
ballot relates, 
• are at least 15 years old,
• and  have  been  members  of  the  Party  for  at  least  six

(b)

months; and 
to  divisional  office-bearers  elected  by 
the
members  at  large  of  the  division  in  which  the
electorate  is  located;  provided  that  the  division's
constitution  may  remove  this  right  from  some  or
all divisional office-bearers.

16.4.1 Persons  whose  names  are  on  an  appropriate  public 
electoral  roll  are  deemed  to  meet  residential  and  age 
qualifications unless demonstrated otherwise. 

16.4.2 Persons  whose  names  are  not  on  an  appropriate 
public  electoral  roll  may  be  required  to  substantiate 
their eligibility. 

16.4.3 A  Division  may  adopt  particular  provisions 

for 
endorsing  candidates  for  local  government  elections 
in that state, provided that all members who reside in 
a  particular  municipality  are  given  the  opportunity  to 
vote  in  endorsement  ballots  for  candidates  in  that 
municipality. 

17 

(Section Repealed) 

18  REGULATIONS
18.1  The 

regulations  prescribe 

implementing 
constitution. 

the  principles 

the  procedures 
in 

identified 

for 
this 

18.2  The  regulations  may  be  amended  by  the  National 

Executive as follows: 

a) A proposal to amend the regulations shall be published
in the National Journal and advised to the secretaries
of each Division; and 

b) the amendment is supported by an absolute majority of

the National Executive;

18.3  National  Executive  may  amend  regulations  without 
prior  notification  in  the  journal or to Divisions, but such 
approval  requires  a  two-thirds  majority  vote  and  must 
be  published  in  the  National  Journal  and  advised  to 
Divisions within four months or the regulation lapses. 
18.4 A regulation may be disallowed by a membership ballot 
if the petition number signs a petition requesting such a 
ballot. Arguments for and against the disallowance shall 
be presented to members.  

. 

19  USE OF PARTY FUNDS
The  Party  is  a  non-profit  organisation  and  accordingly  the 
following provisions shall apply: 
19.1  The  income  and  property  of  the  Party  howsoever  and 
whencesoever  derived  or  acquired  shall  be  applied 
solely  towards  the  promotion  of  the  objects  and  policy 
objectives  of  the  Party  as  set  forth  in  this  Constitution 
and  no  portion  thereof  shall  be  paid  or  transferred 
directly  or  indirectly  by  way  of  dividend  bonus  or 
otherwise to the members of the Party. 
Provided that 
(a)  nothing  herein  contained  shall  prevent 

the
payment  in  good  faith  of  remuneration  to  any
officers or servants of the Party or to any member
of  the  Party  in  return  for  any  services  actually
rendered to the Party or for goods supplied in the
ordinary  and  usual  way  of  business  nor  prevent
the payment of interest at a rate not exceeding the
rate  of  interest  paid  for  the  time  being  by  the
Party's bankers in respect of term deposits having
a  maturity  of  180  days  on  money  borrowed  from
any member of the Party

(b) any  member  who  is  a  member  of  the  National
Executive of the Party pursuant to Clause 6.1 and
who  is  appointed  to  any  salaried  office  of  the

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 15 ---

19.2 

Party or any office of the Party paid by fees shall 
upon  such  appointment  be  deemed  to  have 
vacated the office specified in Clause 6.1 to which 
such member was elected. 

(c) no  remuneration  or  other  benefit  in  money  or
money's worth shall be paid or given by the Party
to  any  voting  member  of  the  National  Executive
except  repayment  of  out-of-pocket  expenses  and
interest  at  the  rate  afore-said  on  money  lent  or
reasonable and proper rent for premises demised
let or sublet to the Party.

If upon the winding-up or dissolution of the Party there 
remains  after  satisfaction  of  all  its  debts  and  liabilities 
any property whatsoever the same shall not be paid to 
or  distributed  among  the  members  of  the  Party  but 
shall be given or transferred to some other institution or 
institutions having objects and objectives similar to the 
policy objectives of the Party and whose memorandum 
the 
of  association  or  constitution  shall  prohibit 
distribution  of  its  or  their  income  and  property  among 
its or their members to an extent at least as great as is 
imposed on the Party under or by virtue of Clause 19.1 
hereof  such  institution  or  institutions  to  be  determined 
by ballot of members of the Party at or before the time 
of  dissolution  and  in  default  thereof  by  application  to 
the    Supreme  Court  of  the  Australian  Capital  Territory 
for determination. 

20  DISSOLUTION
The  Party  shall  not  be  dissolved  except  by  resolution  of  the 
full membership passed in a postal ballot held in accordance 
with this constitution provided that such resolution shall not be 
passed unless there are 70 per cent or more of the votes cast 
which favour the resolution and the total number of votes cast 
is  at  least  25  percent  of  the  full  membership.    Provided  that 
the total number of votes cast is at least 25 percent of the full 
membership  and  further  provided  that  the  dissolution  of  the 
Party shall not become effective until 
(a)

30  days  after  the  result  of  any  ballot  required  under
Clause  19.2  is  declared  or  any  determination  of  the
Supreme Court of Australian Capital Territory pursuant
to Clause 19.2 is made, or
if  no  such  ballot  or  determination  is  required  then  30
days  after  the  declaration  of  a  successful  resolution is
passed in accordance with this Clause 20 or
such other date as the resolution passed to this Clause
20 shall stipulate whichever is the later.

(b)

(c)

  Additional Regulations

1 
1.0 

DEFINITIONS
In  these  regulations,  unless  inconsistent  with  the 
context or some other meaning is clearly intended: 
'executive' means the National Executive of the Party; 
'journal' means the National Journal of the Party; 
'national 
constitution'  means 
the  National 
Constitution  of  the  Australian  Democrats  upon  which 
these  regulations  depend,  pursuant  to  Clause  18.1  of 
that constitution; 
'president' means the National President of the Party; 
'recognised  groups'  means  a  group  or  organisation 
recognised by the Party according to the provisions of 
section 2 of these regulations; 
'secretary' means the National Secretary of the Party. 

1.1  Expressions  referring  to  writing  must  be  construed  as 
including 
lithography, 
to 
photography and other modes of representing words in 
a visible form; 

references 

printing, 

14 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

1.2  Words  or  expressions  in  the  singular  form  must  be 

construed as including the plural form and vice versa; 

1.3  Words  or  expressions  in  the  feminine  form  must  be 
construed  as  including  the  masculine  form  and  vice 
versa; 

1.4  Words  or  expressions  referring  to  persons  must  be 
to  corporations, 

construed  as 
including  reference 
partnerships and associations as well as individuals; 

1.5  Words  or  expressions  contained  in  these  regulations 
must  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  the  provisions 
of the national constitution; and 
The  heading  notes 
regulations. 

form  no  portion  of 

these 

1.6 

2 
2.1 

2.2 

RECOGNISED GROUPS 
The  Party  may 
recognise  specific  groups  or 
organisations that are formed on the basis of shared or 
common  interests.    This  recognition  may  only  be 
accorded by a decision of the executive.  The status of 
a  recognised  group  does  not  imply  any  financial  or 
other liability.  Nor does the status of recognised group 
imply  any  financial  or  other  relationship  between  the 
Party and the recognised group. 
This  recognition  of  specific  groups  or  organisations 
may involve permission for the group or organisation to 
use  the  name  of  the  Party,  and  the  executive  must 
specify  the  manner  and  conditions  under  which  the 
group  or  organisation  may  use  the  name  of  the  Party 
when this permission is given. 

2.3  Before  a  group  or  organisation  may  be  recognised  it 

must provide to the secretary: 
(a) a copy of its constitution, or whatever document or
documents  serve  in  the  role  of  constitution,  and
any  other  form  of  regulating  or  binding  document
which  exists  and  relates  to  the  affairs  of  the
organisation;
(b) an  outline  of 

the  proposed  and/or  actual

constituency of the group or organisation;

(c) an audited statement of the financial affairs of the

group or organisation;

(d) a  list  of  the  actual  or  proposed  office  holders  of

the group or organisation;

(e) an  undertaking  from  the  group  or  organisation  to
use  the  name  of  the  Party  and  the  status  of
recognised  group  in  ways  which  are  not  against
the interests of the Party, and to cease using the
name  of  the  Party  if  the  status  of  recognised
group is withdrawn.

2.4 

2.5 

The  executive  must  consider  a  valid  request  from  a 
group  or  organisation  for  recognised  group  status 
within  six  (6)  months  of  the  receipt  of  that  request  by 
the  secretary.    The  executive  must  resolve  to  give  or 
refuse  the  status  of  recognised  group  within  twelve 
(12) months  of  a  valid  request.    A  request  for  this
is  valid  when  accompanied  by  all
recognition 
supporting 
these
documentation 
regulations.
In the event that a request for the status of recognised 
group  is  refused  by  the  executive  then  the  reason  or 
reasons  for  the  refusal  must  be  supplied  to  the 
governing body of that group or organisation. 

required 

by 

2.6  A recognised group must: 

to 

(a) notify 

the  secretary  of  any  changes 
its
constitution,  or  whatever  document or documents
serve  in  the  role  of  constitution,  and  of  any
change in circumstances relating to the existence
of any form of regulating or binding document that
relates to the affairs of the organisation; and
(b) submit to the secretary each year after the Annual
General  Meeting,  or  equivalent  meeting,  of  the
recognised group a list of the actual office holders
and an audited statement of the financial affairs of
the group.

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release


--- Page 16 ---

2.7 

2.8 

The  secretary  must  keep,  or  cause  to  be  kept,  the 
original  documents  which  comprised  the  valid  request 
for  the  status  of  recognition  group,  along  with  any 
documents  submitted  in  compliance  with  regulation 
2.6. 
The  executive  may  remove  the  status  of  recognised 
group from a group or organisation by resolution of the 
executive to that effect, and in that event the reason or 
reasons  for  the  removal  must  be  supplied  to  the 
governing  body  of  that  group  or  organisation  where 
such governing body exists and can be identified. 

-Ends-
_________________________________________________ 

15 National Constitution and Regulations of the Australian Democrats

LS7540 Released Document No. 12Freedom of Information Release